ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
COURSES
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES IN
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Primarily for undergraduates; graduate students may enroll with
consent of adviser.
EE 14N. Things about Stuff
Preference to freshmen. The stories behind disruptive inventions
such as the telegraph, telephone, wireless, television, transistor,
and chip are as important as the inventions themselves, for they
elucidate broadly applicable scientific principles. Focus is on
studying consumer devices; projects include building batteries,
energy conversion devices and semiconductors from pocket
change. Students may propose topics and projects of interest to
them. The trajectory of the course is determined in large part by
the students themselves. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 15N. The Art and Science of Engineering Design
The goal of this seminar is to introduce freshmen to the design
process associated with an engineering project. The seminar will
consist of a series of lectures. The first part of each lecture will
focus on the different design aspects of an engineering project,
including formation of the design team, developing a project
statement, generating design ideas and specifications, finalizing the
design, and reporting the outcome. Students will form teams to
follow these procedures in designing a term project of their choice
over the quarter. The second part of each lecture will consist of
outside speakers, including founders of some of the most exciting
companies in Silicon Valley, who will share their experiences
about engineering design. On-site visits to Silicon Valley
companies to showcase their design processes will also be part of
the course. The seminar serves three purposes: (1) it introduces
students to the design process of turning an idea into a final design,
(2) it presents the GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 17N. Engineering the Micro and Nano Worlds: From
Chips to Genes
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
The first part is hands-on micro- and nano-fabrication including
the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF) and the Stanford
Nanocharacterization Laboratory (SNL) and field trips to local
companies and other research centers to illustrate the many
applications; these include semiconductor integrated circuits
('chips'), DNA microarrays, microfluidic bio-sensors and
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The second part is to
create, design, propose and execute a project. Most of the grade
will be based on the project. By the end of the course you will, of
course, be able to read critically a New York Times article on
nanotechnology. More importantly you will have experienced the
challenge (and fun) of designing, carrying out and presenting your
own experimental project. As a result you will be better equipped
to choose your major. This course can complement (and differs
from) the seminars offered by Profs Philip Wong and Hari
Manohar GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Pease, R)
EE 19N. The Internet: how it works and the services it offers
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. The Internet is a universal
communication system that spans the entire globe and enables a
wide range of services. It is very loosely managed, yet it works
very well. The goal of this seminar is two-fold: (i) to describe how
the Internet infrastructure works (its underlying functions and
protocols) and (ii) to explore the many services that it offers (web
browsing, social networking, VoIP, IPTV, etc.) Students will work
in groups of two on projects related to Internet functions and
services. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Tobagi, F)
EE 21N. What is Nanotechnology?
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Nanotechnology is an
often used word and it means many things to different people.
Scientists and Engineers have some notion of what
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 645
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
nanotechnology is, societal perception may be entirely different. In
this course, we start with the classic paper by Richard Feynman
(There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom), which laid down the
challenge to the nanotechnologists. Then we discuss two classic
books that offer a glimpse of what nanotechnology is: Engines of
Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology by Eric Drexler,
and Prey by Michael Crichton. Drexler's thesis sparked the
imagination of what nano machinery might do, whereas Crichton's
popular novel channeled the public's attention to this subject by
portraying a disastrous scenario of a technology gone astray. We
will use the scientific knowledge to analyze the assumptions and
predictions of these classic works. We will draw upon the latest
research advances to illustrate the possibilities and impossibilitie
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Wong, P)
EE 22N. Medical Imaging Systems
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
The technology of major imaging modalities used for disease
diagnosis: x-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance; their history,
societal impact, and clinical applications. Field trips to a medical
center and an imaging research lab. Term paper and presentation.
Prerequisites: high school physics and calculus. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Nishimura, D)
EE 25Q. Electric Automobiles and Aircraft
(S,Sem) (Same as AA 116N) Stanford Introductory Seminar.
Transportation accounts for nearly one-third of American energy
use and greenhouse gas emissions and three-quarters of American
oil consumption. It has crucial impacts on climate change, air
pollution, resource depletion, and national security. Students
wishing to address these issues will need to reconsider how we
move, finding sustainable transportation solutions. This course will
provide an introduction to the issue, covering the past and present
of transportation and its impacts; examining alternative fuel
proposals; and digging deeper into the most promising option:
battery electric vehicles. Energy requirements of air, ground, and
maritime transportation; design of electric motors, power control
systems, drive trains, and batteries; and technologies for generating
renewable energy. Two fun opportunities for hands-on experiences
with electric cars. Prerequisites: Introduction to calculus and
Physics AP or elementary mechanics. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Cox, D; Enge, P)
EE 26N. Green Electronics
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Many green technologies
including hybrid cars, photovoltaic energy systems, efficient power
supplies, and energy-conserving control systems have at their heart
intelligent, high-power electronics. This freshman seminar
examines the technology at the heart of the green-tech revolution
and uses green-tech examples to teach the engineering principles
of modeling, optimization, analysis, simulation, and design. The
class will include a hands-on lab, readings, and discussion.
Preference given to Freshman. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Dally, W)
EE 27N. Electronics Rocks
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Electronics pervades our
lives, yet we often feel obliged to let a device function as it was
intended. This course is about not being intimidated by voiding a
warranty and modding some commercial gadget and about being
confident enough to build something cool from scratch. To get
there, we will study the basics of how things work and learn how
to hack/mod and scratch build. Students will be mentored and
encouraged to work, in teams, to play with interesting electronics
and ultimately to develop a creative final project. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Kovacs, G)
EE 28N. What Is Information?
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Information is everywhere
in our lives, from speaking and writing to web pages and social
networking, but what is it actually? How do we define it? Is it
physical? Can we measure it? Does it obey scientific laws? How
do we send it, store it, access it and manipulate it? Are there limits
to it? Will information technology save the planet or destroy it?
This freshman seminar will examine the history, science,
technology and future of information.
3 units, Spr (Miller, D)
EE 41. Physics of Electrical Engineering
(Same as ENGR 40P) How everything from electrostatics to
quantum mechanics is used in common high-technology products.
Electrostatics are critical in micro-mechanical systems used in
many sensors and displays, and Electromagnetic waves are
essential in all high-speed communication systems. How to
propagate energy on transmission lines, optical fibers,and in free
space. Which aspects of modern physics are needed to generate
light for the operation of a DVD player or TV. Introduction to
semiconductors, solid-state light bulbs, and laser pointers. Handson
labs to connect physics to everyday experience. Prerequisites:
Physics 43 GER:DB-EngrAppSci
5 units, Win (Solgaard, O)
EE 46. Engineering For Good: Save the World and Have Fun
Doing It
Projects that provide immediate and positive impact on the world.
Focus is on global health by learning from experts in this field.
Students work on real-world projects with help from members of
NGOs and social entrepreneurial companies as part of the hand-on
learning experience. Prerequisite: ENGR 40 or EE 122A or CS
106B or consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 47. Press Play: Interactive Device Design
Introduction to the human-centered and technical workings behind
interactive devices ranging from cellphones and video controllers
to smart cars and appliances. Students build a working MP3 player
prototype of their own design, using embedded microcontrollers,
digital audio decoders and component sensors, and other electronic
hardware. Topics include electronics prototyping, interface
prototyping, sensors and actuators, micro-controller development,
physical prototyping, and user testing. Prerequisite: CS106A and X
or consent of instructor.
3 units, Spr (Ju, W)
EE 48. Hacking Stuff
In this course, you will build miniature autonomous cars that
compete in a race against the clock. You will learn how to design a
complete system by bringing together the various disciplines of
electrical engineering such as control theory, circuit design,
microprocessor programming, and semiconductor device physics.
You will design, build and program each component of your
autonomous vehicle yourself and in doing so, you will be
introduced to the broad discipline of electrical engineering through
lab work. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 60N. Man versus Nature: Coping with Disasters Using
Space Technology
(F,Sem) (Same as GEOPHYS 60N) Stanford Introductory
Seminar. Preference to freshman. Natural hazards, earthquakes,
volcanoes, floods, hurricanes, and fires, and how they affect people
and society; great disasters such as asteroid impacts that
periodically obliterate many species of life. Scientific issues,
political and social consequences, costs of disaster mitigation, and
how scientific knowledge affects policy. How spaceborne imaging
technology makes it possible to respond quickly and mitigate
consequences; how it is applied to natural disasters; and remote
sensing data manipulation and analysis. Offered every year, winter
quarter. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 100. The Electrical Engineering Profession
(Same as EE 100X) Lectures/discussions on topics of importance
to the electrical engineering professional. Continuing education,
professional societies, intellectual property and patents, ethics,
entrepreneurial engineering, and engineering management.
1-2 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 100X. The Electrical Engineering Profession
(Same as EE 100) Lectures/discussions on topics of importance to
the electrical engineering professional. Continuing education,
professional societies, intellectual property and patents, ethics,
entrepreneurial engineering, and engineering management. WIM
1-2 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 101A. Circuits I
First of two-course sequence. Introduction to circuit modeling and
analysis. Topics include creating the models of typical components
in electronic circuits and simplifying non-linear models for
646?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
restricted ranges of operation (small signal model); and using
network theory to solve linear and non-linear circuits under static
and dynamic operations. Prerequisite: Physics 43 GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Wong, S)
EE 101B. Circuits II
Second of two-course sequence. MOS large-signal and smallsignal
models. MOS amplifier design including DC bias, small
signal performance, multistage amplifiers, frequency response, and
feedback. Prerequisite: 101A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Staff)
EE 102A. Signal Processing and Linear Systems I
Concepts and mathematical tools in continuous-time signal
processing and linear systems analysis, illustrated with examples
from signal processing, communications, and control.
Mathematical representation of signals and systems. Linearity and
time-invariance. System impulse and step response. Frequency
domain representations: Fourier series and Fourier transforms.
Filtering and signal distortion. Time/frequency sampling and
interpolation. Continuous-discrete time signal conversion and
quantization.Stability and causality in linear systems. Laplace
transforms and Bode plots. Feedback and control system design.
Examples from filter design and linear control. Prerequisite:
MATH 53 or ENGR 155A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Pauly, J)
EE 102B. Signal Processing and Linear Systems II
Concepts and mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing
and linear systems analysis with examples from digital signal
processing, communications, and control. Discrete-time signal
models. Continuous-discrete-continuous signal conversion.
Discrete-time impulse and step response. Frequency domain
representations: Fourier series and transforms. Connection between
continuous and discrete time frequency representations. Discrete
Fourier transform (DFT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT). Digital
filter and signal processing examples. Discrete-time and hybrid
linear systems. Stability and causality. Z transforms and their
connection to Laplace transforms. Frequency response of discretetime
systems. Discrete-time control. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Kahn, J)
EE 108A. Digital Systems I
Digital circuit, logic, and system design. Digital representation of
information. CMOS logic circuits. Combinational logic design.
Logic building blocks, idioms, and structured design. Sequential
logic design and timing analysis. Clocks and synchronization.
Finite state machines. Microcode control. Digital system design.
Control and datapath partitioning. Lab. Prerequisite: ENGR 40.
Corequisite for WIM: ENGR 102E. GER:DB-EngrAppSci, WIM
3-4 units, Aut (Dally, W), Win (Mitra, S)
EE 108B. Digital Systems II
The design of processor-based digital systems. Instruction sets,
addressing modes, data types. Assembly language programming,
low-level data structures, introduction to operating systems and
compilers. Processor microarchitecture, microprogramming,
pipelining. Memory systems and caches. Input/output, interrupts,
buses and DMA. System design implementation alternatives,
software/hardware tradeoffs. Labs involve the design of processor
subsystems and processor-based embedded systems. Prerequisite:
108A, CS 106B. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Aut (Olukotun, O), Win (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 109. Digital Systems Design Lab
The design of integrated digital systems encompassing both
customized software and hardware. Software/hardware design
tradeoffs. Algorithm design for pipelining and parallelism. System
latency and throughput tradeoffs. FPGA optimization techniques.
Integration with external systems and smart devices. Firmware
configuration and embedded system considerations. Enrollment
limited to 25; preference to graduating seniors. Prerequisites:
108B, and CS 106B or X. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Olukotun, O)
EE 114. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design
(Same as EE 214A) Analysis and simulation of elementary
transistor stages, current mirrors, supply- and temperatureindependent
bias, and reference circuits. Overview of integrated
circuit technologies, circuit components, component variations and
practical design paradigms. Performance evaluation using
computer-aided design tools. Prerequisite: 101B.GER:DBEngrAppSci
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 116. Semiconductor Device Physics
The fundamental operation of semiconductor devices and overview
of applications. The physical principles of semiconductors, both
silicon and compound materials; operating principles and device
equations for junction devices (diodes, bipolar transistor, photodetectors).
Introduction to quantum effects and band theory of
solids. Prerequisite: ENGR 40. Corequisite: 101B. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Staff)
EE 122A. Analog Circuits Laboratory
Practical applications of analog circuits, including simple
amplifiers, filters, oscillators, power supplies, and sensors. Design
skills, computer-aided design, and circuit fabrication and
debugging. The design process through proposing, designing,
simulating, building, debugging, and demonstrating a project.
Radio frequency and largely digital projects not suitable for EE
122. Prerequisite: ENGR 40 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Kovacs, G)
EE 122B. Introduction to Biomedical Electronics
Key components of modern systems, their application in
physiology measurements, and reduction to practice in labs.
Fundamentals of analog/digital conversion and filtering techniques
for biosignals, typical transducers (biopotential, electrochemical,
temperature, pressure, acoustic, movement), and interfacing
circuits. Issues of biomedical electronics (safety, noise).
Prerequisite: EE122A or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Kovacs, G)
EE 124. Introduction to Neuroelectrical Engineering
Fundamental properties of electrical activity in neurons,
technology for measuring and altering neural activity, and
operating principles of modern neurological and neural prosthetic
medical systems. Topics: action potential generation and
propagation, neuro-MEMS and measurement systems,
experimental design and statistical data analysis, information
encoding and decoding, clinical diagnostic systems, and fullyimplantable
neural prosthetic systems design. Prerequisite: EE
101B and EE 102B.
3 units, Win (Shenoy, K)
EE 133. Analog Communications Design Laboratory
(Same as EE 233) Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude
modulation (AM) using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation
(FM) based on discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits
such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop
(PLL) techniques, characterization of key parameters, and their
applications. Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs
involve building and characterization of AM and FM
modulation/demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment
limited to 30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students.
Prerequisite: EE101B. Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and
Graduate students enroll in EE233. Recommended: EE114/214A.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 134. Introduction to Photonics
Photonics, optical components, and fiber optics. Conceptual and
mathematical tools for design and analysis of optical
communication, sensor and imaging systems. Experimental
characterization of semiconductor lasers, optical fibers,
photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links, optical
amplifiers, and optical sensors. Class project on confocal
microscopy or other method of sensing or analyzing biometric
data. Laboratory experiments. Prerequisite: 41 or equivalent.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Ellerbee, A)
EE 136. Introduction to Nanophotonics and Nanostructures
Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and
semiconductors. Confining these waves, and devices employing
such confinement. Localization of light and applications: metallic
mirrors, photonic crystals, optical waveguides, microresonators,
plasmonics. Localization of quantum mechanical waves: quantum
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 647
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
wells, wires, and dots. Generation of light in semiconductors:
spontaneous and stimulated emission, lasers, and light emitting
diodes. Devices incorporating localization of both electromagnetic
and quantum mechanical waves such as resonant cavity quantum
well lasers and microcavity-based single photon sources. Systemlevel
applications such as optical communications, biochemical
sensing, and quantum cryptography. Prerequisite: familiarity with
electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and
semiconductors at the level of EE 41 or equivalent. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Vuckovic, J)
EE 141. Engineering Electromagnetics
Lumped versus distributed circuits. Transient response of
transmission lines with resistive and reactive loads. Reflection,
transmission, attenuation and dispersion. Steady-state waves on
transmission lines. Standing wave ratio, impedance matching, and
power flow. Coulomb's law, electrostatic field, potential and
gradient, electric flux and Gauss's Law and divergence. Metallic
conductors, Poisson's and Laplace's equations, capacitance,
dielectric materials. Electrostatic energy and forces. Steady electric
currents, Ohm's Law, Kirchoff's Laws, charge conservation and the
continuity equation, Joule's Law. Biot-Savart's law and the static
magnetic field. Ampere's Law and curl. Vector magnetic potential
and magnetic dipole. Magnetic materials, forces and torques.
Faraday's Law, magnetic energy, displacement current and
Maxwell's equations. Uniform plane waves. Prerequisites: 102A,
MATH 52. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Hesselink, L)
EE 151. Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy demand is expected to grow by 30% by 2025, while at the
same time the European Union is demanding a carbon footprint at
1990 levels. We examine energy flow in the US and Europe, and
deduce from it a strategy for sustainable growth. Potential
solutions include distributed small scale networked energy
generation, solar energy, wind and water, as well as nuclear
energy. A systems perspective allows optimization. Fundamental
concepts will be demonstrated in class through hands-on
experiments.
3 units, Win (Hesselink, L)
EE 168. Introduction to Digital Image Processing
Computer processing of digital 2-D and 3-D data, combining
theoretical material with implementation of computer algorithms.
Topics: properties of digital images, design of display systems and
algorithms, time and frequency representations, filters, image
formation and enhancement, imaging systems, perspective,
morphing, and animation applications. Instructional computer lab
exercises implement practical algorithms. Final project consists of
computer animations incorporating techniques learned in class.
Prerequisite: Matlab programming. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 169. Introduction to Bioimaging
Bioimaging is important for both clinical medicine, and medical
research. This course will provide a introduction to several of the
major imaging modalities, using a signal processing perspective.
The course will start with an introduction to multi-dimensional
Fourier transforms, and image quality metrics. It will then study
projection imaging systems (projection X-Ray), backprojection
based systems (CT, PET, and SPECT), systems that use beam
forming (ultrasound), and systems that use Fourier encoding
(MRI).
3 units, Spr (Pauly, J)
EE 178. Probabilistic Systems Analysis
(Same as EE 278A) Introduction to probability and statistics and
their role in modeling and analyzing real world phenomena.
Events, sample space, and probability. Discrete random variables,
probability mass functions, independence and conditional
probability, expectation and conditional expectation. Continuous
random variables, probability density functions, independence and
expectation, derived densities. Transforms, moments, sums of
independent random variables. Simple random processes. Limit
theorems. Introduction to statistics: significance, estimation and
detection. Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Aut (Weissman, I), Spr (Prabhakar, B)
EE 179. Analog and Digital Communication Systems
This course covers the fundamental principles underlying the
analysis, design and optimization of analog and digital
communication systems. Design examples will be taken from the
most prevalent communication systems today: cell phones, Wifi,
radio and TV broadcasting, satellites, and computer networks.
Analysis techniques based on Fourier transforms and energy/power
spectral density will be developed. Mathematical models for
random variables and random (noise) signals will be presented,
which are used to characterize filtering and modulation of random
noise. These techniques will then be used to design analog (AM
and FM) and digital (PSK and FSK) communication systems and
determine their performance over channels with noise and
interference. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Staff)
EE 190. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member.
Individual or team activities involve lab experimentation, design of
devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S), Sum
(Staff)
EE 191. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given
for a letter grade only. If a letter grade given on the basis of
required written report or examination is not appropriate, enroll in
190.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S), Sum
(Staff)
GRADUATE COURSES IN ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
Primarily for graduate students; undergraduates may enroll with
consent of instructor.
EE 202. Electrical Engineering in Biology and Medicine
Open to all. Primarily biological in nature, introduction to the
physiological and anatomic aspects of medical instrumentation.
Areas include patient monitoring, imaging, medical transducers,
the unique aspects of medical electronic systems, the socioeconomic
impact of technology on medical care, and the
constraints unique to medicine. Prerequisite: familiarity with
circuit instrumentation techniques as in 101B.
3 units, Spr (Poon, A)
EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer
Seminar. For prospective entrepreneurs with an engineering
background. Contributions made to the business world by
engineering graduates. Speakers include Stanford and other
engineering and M.B.A. graduates who have founded large and
small companies in nearby communities. Contributions from EE
faculty and other departments including Law, Business, and
MS&E.
1 unit, Win (Melen, R)
EE 204. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and
Computer Scientists
For graduate students with little or no business experience.
Leading computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and
their best practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions
these companies face. Corporate strategy, new product
development, marketing, sales, distribution, customer service,
financial accounting, outsourcing, and human behavior in business
organizations. Case studies. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
3 units, Spr (Gibbons, F; Siegel, M)
EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes
For students interested in the physical bases and practical methods
of silicon VLSI chip fabrication, or the impact of technology on
device and circuit design, or intending to pursue doctoral research
involving the use of Stanford's Nanofabrication laboratory. Process
simulators illustrate concepts. Topics: principles of integrated
circuit fabrication processes, physical and chemical models for
crystal growth, oxidation, ion implantation, etching, deposition,
lithography, and back-end processing. Required for 410.
3 units, Aut (Plummer, J)
EE 214A. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design
(Same as EE 114) Analysis and simulation of elementary transistor
648?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
stages, current mirrors, supply- and temperature-independent bias,
and reference circuits. Overview of integrated circuit technologies,
circuit components, component variations and practical design
paradigms. Performance evaluation using computer-aided design
tools. Prerequisite: 101B.GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 214B. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits in advanced MOS
and bipolar technologies. Device operation and compact modeling
in support of circuit simulations needed for design. Emphasis on
quantitative evaluations of performance using hand calculations
and circuit simulations; intuitive approaches to design. Analytical
and approximate treatments of noise and distortion; analysis and
design of feedback circuits. Design of archetypal analog blocks for
networking and communications such as broadband gain stages
and transimpedance amplifiers. Prerequisites: EE114/214A.
3 units, Win (Staff)
EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices
Carrier generation, transport, recombination, and storage in
semiconductors. Physical principles of operation of the p-n
junction, heterojunction, metal semiconductor contact, bipolar
junction transistor, MOS capacitor, MOS and junction field-effect
transistors, and related optoelectronic devices such as CCDs, solar
cells, LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models that reflect
physical principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis
and design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.
3 units, Aut (Harris, J), Win (Saraswat, K; Howe, R)
EE 218. Introduction to Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics
Device physics and operation principles. Device and material
options beyond silicon FETs at the nanoscale. Topics identified by
the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors,
emerging research devices section; see http://public.itrs.net. Nonsilicon-
based devices such as carbon nanotubes, semiconductor
nanowires, and molecular devices; and non-FET based devices
such as single-electron transistors (SET), resonant tunneling diodes
(RTD), and quantum dots. Logic and memory devices. Sources
include current literature and reference books. Prerequisite:
Undergraduate device physics. Recommended: Introductory
graduate solid state physics.
3 units, not given this year
EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I
Emphasis is on applications in modern devices and systems.
Topics include: Schrödinger's equation, eigenfunctions and
eigenvalues, solutions of simple problems including quantum wells
and tunneling, quantum harmonic oscillator, coherent states,
operator approach to quantum mechanics, Dirac notation, angular
momentum, hydrogen atom, calculation techniques including
matrix diagonalization, perturbation theory, variational method,
and time-dependent perturbation theory with applications to optical
absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and Fermi's golden rule.
Prerequisites: MATH 52 and 53, PHYSICS 65 (or PHYSICS 43
and 45).
3 units, Aut (Miller, D)
EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II
Continuation of 222, including more advanced topics: quantum
mechanics of crystalline materials, methods for one-dimensional
problems, spin, systems of identical particles (bosons and
fermions), introductory quantum optics (electromagnetic field
quantization, coherent states), fermion annihilation and creation
operators, interaction of different kinds of particles (spontaneous
emission, optical absorption, and stimulated emission). Quantum
information and interpretation of quantum mechanics. Other topics
in electronics, optoelectronics, optics, and quantum information
science. Prerequisite: 222.
3 units, Win (Miller, D)
EE 225. Bio-chips, Imaging and Nanomedicine
(Same as MATSCI 382) The course covers state-of-the-art and
emerging bio-sensors, bio-chips, imaging modalities, and nanotherapies
which will be studied in the context of human physiology
including the nervous system, circulatory system and immune
system. Medical diagnostics will be divided into bio-chips (in-vitro
diagnostics) and medical and molecular imaging (in-vivo
imaging). In-depth discussion on cancer and cardiovascular
diseases and the role of diagnostics and nano-therapies.
3 units, Win (Wang, S; de la Zerda, A; Akin, D)
EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics
Topics: energy band theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering,
classical kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and
non-equilibrium semiconductor statistics. Prerequisite: course in
modern physics.
3 units, not given this year
EE 231. Introduction to Lasers
How lasers work, including quantum transitions in atoms,
stimulated emission and amplification, rate equations, saturation,
feedback, coherent optical oscillation, laser resonators, and optical
beams. Limited primarily to steady-state behavior; classical
models for atomic transitions with little quantum mechanics
background required. Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory to the
level of 142, preferably 241, and some atomic or modern physics
such as PHYSICS 70 or 130, 131.
3 units, not given this year
EE 232. Laser Dynamics
Continuation of 231, emphasizing dynamic and transient effects
including spiking, Q-switching, mode locking, frequency
modulation, frequency and spatial mode competition, linear and
nonlinear pulse propagation, short pulse expansion, and
compression. Prerequisite: 231.
3 units, Spr (Fejer, M)
EE 233. Analog Communications Design Laboratory
(Same as EE 133) Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude
modulation (AM) using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation
(FM) based on discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits
such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop
(PLL) techniques, characterization of key parameters, and their
applications. Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs
involve building and characterization of AM and FM
modulation/demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment
limited to 30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students.
Prerequisite: EE101B. Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and
Graduate students enroll in EE233. Recommended: EE114/214A.
3-4 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 234. Photonics Laboratory
Photonics and fiber optics with a focus on communication and
sensing. Experimental characterization of semiconductor lasers,
optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links,
optical amplifiers, and optical sensors and photonic crystals.
Prerequisite: EE 142 or equivalent.
3 units, Aut (Solgaard, O; Ellerbee, A)
EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices
Guided wave optics, optical waveguide devices, and integrated
optics. Wave propagation in layered media, slab waveguides, and
optical fibers. Rectangular waveguides. Optical waveguide
technology. Coupled-mode theory. Numerical analysis of complex
waveguides. Photonic crystals and surface plasmon optics. Physics
and design of waveguide devices. Fiber sensors, waveguide
gratings, waveguide modulators, directional couplers, ring filters.
Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory to the level of 142 or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 237. Solar Energy Conversion
Basics of solar energy conversion in photovoltaic devices and solar
thermal systems. Solar cell device physics: electrical and optical.
Solar system issues including module assembly, inverters, and
micro-inverters. Concentrated solar power. Students design solar
cells. Prerequisite: EE 116 or EE 216.
3 units, not given this year
EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves
Continuation of 141. Maxwell's equations. Plane waves in lossless
and lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of electromagnetic power
(Poynting's theorem). Reflection and refraction of waves at planar
boundaries. Snell's law and total internal reflection. Reflection and
refraction from lossy media. Guided waves. Parallel-plate and
dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow wave-guides, cavity
resonators, microstrip waveguides, optical fibers. Interaction of
fields with matter and particles. Antennas and radiation of
electromagnetic energy. Prerequisite: 141 or PHYSICS 120.
3 units, Win (Fraser-Smith, A)
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 649
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor physics and optical processes in semiconductors.
Operating principles and practical device features of
semiconductor optoelectronic materials and heterostructures.
Devices include: optical detectors (p-i-n, avalanche, and MSM);
light emitting diodes; electroabsorptive modulators (Franz-Keldysh
and QCSE), electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-
Zehnder), switches (SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical
cavity surface emitting). Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and
solid state physics such as EE 216 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Harris, J)
EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications
Fibers: single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion,
group-velocity dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear
effects in fibers: Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase
modulation, four-wave mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes,
laser diodes, transverse and longitudinal mode control, modulation,
chirp, linewidth, intensity noise. Modulators: electro-optic, electroabsorption.
Photodiodes: p-i-n, avalanche, responsivity,
capacitance, transit time. Receivers: high-impedance,
transimpedance, bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation
formats: non-return-to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance:
Q factor, bit-error ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity
degradations: extinction ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion.
Wavelength-division multiplexing. System architectures: localarea,
access, metropolitan-area, long-haul. Prerequisites: 102A,
242 or consent of instructor.
3 units, Aut (Kahn, J)
EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes
Fundamentals of statistic, Fourier analysis, statistical and quantum
mechanics, and linear and nonlinear circuit theory. Thermal,
quantum and 1/f noise in resistors, pn junctions, lasers, and
parametric amplifiers. Energy efficiency (bit/photon) and spectral
efficiency (bit/s/Hz) in coherent and single photon optical
communications. Protocols and security in quantum cryptography.
Decoherence of qubits in quantum computation. Prerequisites:
elementary device, circuit, and electromagnetic waves to the level
of 101A,B and 242.
3 units, Aut (Yamamoto, Y)
EE 252. Antenna Theory
Fundamental properties. Dipoles, loops, reflectors, Yagis, helices,
slots, horns, micro-strips. Antennas as transitions between guided
and free radiation, ultrasound analogue. Famous antennas. Pattern
measurements. Friis and radar equations. Feeds, matching, baluns.
Broadbanding. Arrays, aperture synthesis, interferometry, verylong-
baseline interferometry. Thermal radiation, antenna
temperature, microwave passive remote sensing. Prerequisite: EE
141 or Physics 120.
3 units, Win (Poon, A)
EE 254. Principles of Radar Systems
Analysis and design. Radar equation and systems parameters,
components of radar systems, radar cross-section and target
characteristics, signal detection in noise, ambiguity function (with
applications to measurement precision, resolution, clutter rejection,
and waveform design); pulse compression waveforms, synthetic
aperture radar, tracking and scanning radars, HF (OTH) radar,
radar environmental and remote sensing, radar astronomy.
Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing.
3 units, not given this year
EE 257. Scientific Data Processing
(Same as GEOPHYS 258) Assimilation, processing, and modeling
of large observational data sets. Solution of scientific and
engineering problems, especially those requiring large amounts of
data. Inverse methods and transform domain analysis for indirect
measurements, implemented on digital computers using scientific
languages. Large-scale computing, including hardware
architectures, input/output and data bus bandwidth, programming
efficiency, parallel programming techniques. Student projects
involve analyzing real data by implementing an observational
system such as tomography for medical and Earth observation
uses, radar and matched filtering, multispectral/multitemporal
studies, or migration processing. Prequisites: Programming with
high level language. Recommended: EE261, EE178/278A, ME300
or equivalent.
3-4 units, not given this year
EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications
The Fourier transform as a tool for solving physical problems.
Fourier series, the Fourier transform of continuous and discrete
signals and its properties. The Dirac delta, distributions, and
generalized transforms. Convolutions and correlations and
applications; probability distributions, sampling theory, filters, and
analysis of linear systems. The discrete Fourier transform and the
FFT algorithm. Multidimensional Fourier transform and use in
imaging. Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis
is on relating the theoretical principles to solving practical
engineering and science problems. Prerequisites: Math through
ODEs, Fourier series at the level of 102A, and linear algebra.
3 units, Aut (Osgood, B), Win (Gill, J)
EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging
Time and frequency representations, two-dimensional auto- and
cross-correlation, Fourier spectra, diffraction and antennas,
coordinate systems and the Hankel and Abel transforms, line
integrals, impulses and sampling, restoration in the presence of
noise, reconstruction and tomography, imaging radar.
Tomographic reconstruction using projection-slice and layergarm
methods. Students create software to form images using these
techniques with actual data. Final project consists of design and
simulation of an advanced imaging system. Prerequisite: EE261.
Recommended: EE278B, EE279.
3 units, not given this year
EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems
(Same as CME 263) Applied linear algebra and linear dynamical
systems with application to circuits, signal processing,
communications, and control systems. Topics: least-squares
approximations of over-determined equations and least-norm
solutions of underdetermined equations. Symmetric matrices,
matrix norm, and singular value decomposition. Eigenvalues, left
and right eigenvectors, with dynamical interpretation. Matrix
exponential, stability, and asymptotic behavior. Multi-input/multioutput
systems, impulse and step matrices; convolution and
transfer matrix descriptions. Control, reachability, and state
transfer; observability and least-squares state estimation.
Prerequisites: linear algebra and matrices as in MATH 103;
differential equations and Laplace transforms as in EE 102A.
3 units, Aut (Lall, S)
EE 264. Digital Signal Processing
The fundamentals of digital signal processing techniques and their
applications. Topics include review of two sided Z-transform,
linear time invariant discrete-time systems, and sampling theory;
A/D and D/A conversion, rate conversion, and oversampling
techniques for ADC and DAC; filter design; quantization in digital
filter implementation; discrete Fourier analysis; and parametric
signal modeling. Prerequisite: EE102A and EE102B .
Recommended: EE261, EE278B.
3 units, Aut (Schafer, R)
EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory
Applying 102A,B to real-world signal processing applications. Lab
exercises use a programmable DSP to implement signal processing
tasks. Topics: A/D conversion and quantization, sampling theorem,
Z-transform, discrete-time Fourier transform, digital filter design
and implementation, spectral analysis, rate conversion, wireless
data communication, and OFDM receiver design. Prerequisites:
102A,B. Recommended: 261.
3-4 units, Win (Meng, T)
EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics
Geometrical optics: ray matrices, Gaussian beams, optical
instruments, and radiometry. Wave nature of light: Maxwell's
equations, propagation through media with varying index of
refraction (e.g., fibers). Interferometry: basic principles, practical
systems, and applications.
3 units, Aut (Byer, R)
EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems
Provides a quick introduction to MOS transistors and IC
fabrication and then creates abstractions to allow you to create and
reason about complex digital systems. It uses a switch resistor
model of a transistor, uses it to model gates, and then shows how
gates and physical layout can be synthesized from Verilog or
SystemVerilog descriptions. Most of the class will be spent on
providing techniques to create designs that can be validated, are
650?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
low power, provide good performance, and can be completed in
finite time. Prerequisites: 101A and 108B; familiarity with
transistors, logic design, Verilog, and digital system organization.
3 units, Aut (Mitra, S)
EE 272. Design Projects in VLSI Systems
Mixed signal design. Student teams create a small mixed-signal
VLSI design using a modern design flow and CAD tools. The
project involves writing a Verilog model of the chip, creating a
testing/debug strategy for the chip, wrapping custom layout to fit
into a std cell system, using synthesis and place and route tools to
create the layout of your chip, and understanding all the stuff you
need to do to tape-out a chip. Useful for those who plan to build a
chip in their Ph.D. work. Prerequisites: EE 271 and experience in
digital/analog circuit design.
3-4 units, Spr (Horowitz, M)
EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering
Electrical issues in the design of high-performance digital systems,
including signaling, timing, synchronization, noise, and power
distribution. High-speed signaling methods; noise in digital
systems, its effect on signaling, and methods for noise reduction;
timing conventions; timing noise (skew and jitter), its effect on
systems, and methods for mitigating timing noise; synchronization
issues and synchronizer design; clock and power distribution
problems and techniques; impact of electrical issues on system
architecture and design. Prerequisites: EE101A and EE108A.
Recommended: EE114/214A.
3 units, Win (Weaver, J)
EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications
Frequency reuse, cellular concepts, cochannel interference,
handoff. Radio propagation in and around buildings: Friis
equation, multipath, narrow-band and wide-band channels, small
scale and large-scale statistics, space and time signal variation.
Diversity. Receiver sensitivity, sources of noise, range.
Performance statistics: coverage, margin, digital modulation,
adjacent channel interference, and digital error rates. Wide band
channels: maximum transmission rates. Multi-server queuing and
traffic: Erlang formulas. Multiple access: FDMA, TDMA, CDMA;
Duplexing: TDD, FDD. Prerequisites: 242 and 278B or equivalent.
Corequisite: 279 or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Cox, D)
EE 278A. Probabilistic Systems Analysis
(Same as EE 178) Introduction to probability and statistics and
their role in modeling and analyzing real world phenomena.
Events, sample space, and probability. Discrete random variables,
probability mass functions, independence and conditional
probability, expectation and conditional expectation. Continuous
random variables, probability density functions, independence and
expectation, derived densities. Transforms, moments, sums of
independent random variables. Simple random processes. Limit
theorems. Introduction to statistics: significance, estimation and
detection. Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
3-4 units, Aut (Weissman, I), Spr (Prabhakar, B)
EE 278B. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing
Review of basic probability and random variables. Random vectors
and processes; convergence and limit theorems; IID, independent
increment, Markov, and Gaussian random processes; stationary
random processes; autocorrelation and power spectral density;
mean square error estimation, detection, and linear estimation.
Prerequisites: EE178/278A and linear systems and Fourier
transforms at the level of EE102A,B or EE261.
3 units, Aut (El Gamal, A), Win (El Gamal, A)
EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems
Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digital
modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion,
multiplexing, noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise
ratio analysis, probability of error in digital systems, spread
spectrum. Prerequisites: EE179 or EE261, and EE178/278A or
EE278B.
3 units, Win (Cox, D)
EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture
Course focuses on how to build modern computing systems,
namely notebooks, smartphones, and data centers, covering
primarily their hardware architecture and certain system software
aspects. For each system class, we cover the system architecture,
processor technology, advanced memory hierarchy and I/O
organization, power and energy management, and reliability. We
will also cover topics such as interactions with system software,
virtualization, solid state storage, and security. The programming
assignments allow students to explore performance/energy
tradeoffs when using heterogeneous hardware resources on
smartphone devices. Prerequisite: EE108B. Recommended: CS
140.
3 units, Spr (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks
Structure and components of computer networks; functions and
services; packet switching; layered architectures; OSI reference
model; physical layer; data link layer; error control; window flow
control; media access control protocols used in local area networks
(Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI) and satellite networks; network
layer (datagram service, virtual circuit service, routing, congestion
control, Internet Protocol); transport layer (UDP, TCP); application
layer.
3 units, Aut (Tobagi, F)
EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical
Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C,
candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D,
consent of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Nishimura, D), Win (Nishimura, D), Spr
(Nishimura, D), Sum (Staff)
EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical
Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C,
candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D,
consent of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Nishimura, D), Win (Nishimura, D), Spr
(Nishimura, D), Sum (Staff)
EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical
Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C,
candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D,
consent of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Nishimura, D), Win (Nishimura, D), Spr
(Nishimura, D), Sum (Staff)
EE 290D. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical
Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C,
candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D,
consent of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains
Finite-state and countable-state Markov chains. Controlled Markov
chains and dynamic programming algorithms. Application to
modeling and analysis of engineering systems. Prerequisites:
EE263, EE178/278A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 292H. Engineering and Climate Change
The purpose of this seminar series is to help equip students and
professionals with the tools to apply the engineering mindset to
problems that stem from climate change, in order to consider and
evaluate possible interventional, remedial and adaptive
approaches. This course is not a crash course on climate change
(established climate experts are better equipped for that), nor is it a
crash course in policy ¿ instead the course focuses on discovering
and exploring climate problems that seem most likely to benefit
from adding the engineering mindset as solutions are considered.
In each weekly class, a guest speaker will deliver a brief
introductory talk (20-30 minutes) in his/her area of expertise to set
the framework in terms of climate, energy, resource, policy and
public opinion, and then proceed to explore with the class some of
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 651
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
the problems that seem most amenable to engineering input.
Reference material, made available as optional reading, will
include quantitative and overvi
1 unit, Aut (Field, L)
EE 292I. Insanely Great Products: How do they get built?
Great products emerge from a sometimes conflict-laden process of
collaboration be-tween different functions within companies. This
Seminar seeks to demystify this proc-ess via case-studies of
successful products. Engineers and businesspeople will share their
experiences in discussion with students. This year, the co-founder
of Twitter will be one of our guests. Previous guests include:
Apple, Intel, Facebook, and Genentech ¿ to name a few. Students
will have the opportunity to present product ideas to industry professionals
(investors, developers, etc.). Pre-requisites: None
1 unit, not given this year
EE 292J. Power Electronics
This power electronics overview course serves as a practical
primer for specialists from other disciplines or an introduction for
those wishing to investigate the field more deeply. The course
covers a broad range of topics, including; power conversion circuit
modeling and analysis, passive and active devices, converter
topologies, control theory, power magnetics, and numerous
applications. A field trip to the SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory focuses on specialty converters that are unique to high
energy physics. Prerequisites: EE 101B.
3 units, Win (Staff)
EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
(Same as ENERGY 293A) For seniors and graduate students.
Thermodynamics, heat engines, thermoelectics, biomass.
Recommended: MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
3-4 units, Aut (Brandt, A; Horne, R; Krevor, S)
EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
(Same as ENERGY 293B) For seniors and graduate students. Fuel
cells. Production of hydrogen: electrolytic, chemical, thermolytic,
photolytic. Hydrogen storage: hydrides. Photoelectric converters;
photo-thermovoltaic converters. Wind turbines. Recommended:
EE 293A; MATH 41; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
3 units, Win (Brandt, A; Gerritsen, M; Wilcox, J)
EE 300. Master's Thesis and Thesis Research
Independent work under the direction of a department faculty.
Written thesis required for final letter grade. The continuing grade
'N' is given in quarters prior to thesis submission. See 390 if a
letter grade is not appropriate.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 303. Autonomous Implantable Systems
How implantable systems can revolutionize health care in the
coming decades. Potential applications include implantable sensors
and monitoring devices for preventive and post-surgery
monitoring; drug delivery systems that can be placed closer to
cancer cells and are able to administer dosage automatically;
medical robots that perform surgery inside patients with greater
precision and less pain; and neural implants for brain-machine
interface. Focus is on the analysis and design of remotely-powered,
miniature implantable devices for those applications. Prerequisites:
EE114/214A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology
Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of
nanoelectric devices. Topics identified by the International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research
devices sec-tion; see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based
devices such as carbon nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor nanowires,
and molecular devices; and non-FET based devices such
as single electron transistors (SET) and resonant tunneling diodes
(RTD). Logic and memory devices are covered. Prerequisite:
undergra-duate device physics, EE 222, EE 216. Recommended:
EE 212, EE 223, EE 228, EE 311, and EE 316 Offered Alternate
years.
3 units, Spr (Wong, P)
EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar
State-of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology,
advanced materials, and nanoscience for device applications.
Prerequisites: EE216, EE316.
1 unit, Win (Nishi, Y)
EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuits Technology
What are the practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of
the technology of modern MOS devices and interconnects? How
are modern devices and circuits fabricated and what future changes
are likely? Advanced techniques and models of MOS devices and
back-end (interconnect and contact) processing. What are future
device structures and materials to maintain progress in integrated
electronics? MOS front-end and back-end process integration.
Prerequisites: EE212, EE216 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators
Solid-state sensors and actuators, focusing on the use of integrated
circuit fabrication technology for their realization. Categories of
sensors and actuators include biological, chemical, mechanical,
optical, and thermal. Mechanisms of transduction, fabrication
techniques, and relative merits of different technologies.
Micromachining techniques for monolithic integration of active
circuits with sensors or actuators. Directions for future research.
Prerequisite: 212 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Kovacs, G)
EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits
Looks a little more deeply at how digital circuits operate, what
makes a gate digital, and how to cheat to improve performance or
power. To aid this analysis we create a number of different models
for MOS transistors and choose the simplest one that can explain
our the circuit's operation, using both hand and computer analysis.
We explore static, dynamic, pulse-mode, and current mode logic,
and show how they are are used in SRAM design. Topics include
sizing for min delay, noise and noise margins, power dissipation.
The class uses memory design (SRAM) as a motivating example.
DRAM and EEPROM design issues are also covered.
Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended: 271.
3 units, Win (Patil, D)
EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design
Design of RF integrated circuits for communications systems,
primarily in CMOS. Topics: the design of matching networks and
low-noise amplifiers at RF, mixers, modulators, and demodulators;
review of classical control concepts necessary for oscillator design
including PLLs and PLL-based frequency synthesizers. Design of
low phase noise oscillators. Design of high-efficiency (e.g., class
E, F) RF power amplifiers, coupling networks. Behavior and
modeling of passive and active components at RF. Narrowband
and broadband amplifiers; noise and distortion measures and
mitigation methods. Overview of transceiver architectures.
Prerequisite: EE214B.
3 units, Spr (Rategh, H)
EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits
Design and analysis of integrated circuits for active filters,
precision gain stages, and sensor interfaces in CMOS VLSI
technology. Operational transconductance amplifiers; sampleddata
and continuous-time analog filters. Analysis of noise and
amplifier imperfections; compensation techniques such as
correlated double sampling. Sensor interfaces for microelectromechanical
and biomedical applications. Layout techniques
for analog integrated circuits. Prerequisites: EE214B.
3 units, Spr (Staff)
EE 315B. VLSI Data Conversion Circuits
Architectural and circuit level design and analysis of integrated
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS VLSI
technology. Fundamental circuit elements such as sampling
circuits and voltage comparators. Circuits and architectures for
Nyquist-rate and oversampling analog-to-digital and digital-toanalog
conversion; digital decimation and interpolation filters.
Examples of calibration and digital enhancement techniques.
Prerequisite: EE 214B. Recommended: EE 315A.
3 units, Aut (Vleugels, K)
EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices
In modern VLSI technologies, device electrical characteristics are
sensitive to structural details and therefore to fabrication
techniques. How are advanced VLSI devices designed and what
future changes are likely? What are the implications for device
electrical performance caused by fabrication techniques? Physical
models for nanometer scale structures, control of electrical
characteristics (threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic
652?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
transport) in small structures, and alternative device structures for
VLSI. Prerequisites: 212 and 216, or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Wong, P)
EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits
The fundamentals of generating submicron patterns in integrated
circuit manufacturing. Technologies include the formation of
submicron images of ultraviolet light, the resulting exposure of
polymeric resists, the subsequent development of resist patterns
and their transfer into functional circuit material patterns through
plasma etching and other techniques. Use of phase-shifting masks
and other wavefront-engineering approaches. Hands-on computer
simulations. Prerequisites: 141 or equivalent, 212 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology
Recent advances in materials science, device physics and
structures, and processing technology, to extend VLS1 device
scaling towards atomistic and quantum-mechanical physics
boundaries. Topics include: mobility-enhancement techniques;
nanomaterial structures including tube, wire, beam, and crystal;
conducting polymer; 3D FET; gate-wraparound FET; nonvolatile
memory phenomena and devices; self-assembly; flash annealing;
plasma doping; and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.
3 units, not given this year
EE 320. Nanoelectronics
Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of
nanoelectric devices. Topics identified by the International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research
devices section; see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based devices
such as carbon nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor nanowires,
and molecular devices; and non-FET based devices such as single
electron transistors (SET) and resonant tunneling diodes (RTD).
Logic and memory devices. Offered alternative years.
Prerequisites: undergraduate device physics, EE 222, 216.
Recommended: EE 223, 228, or 316.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics
Physics of charge and energy transfer in molecular systems and
connection with traditional mesoscopic transport theories. Analysis
of molecular organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells and
transistors. Technology and applications of molecular
semiconductors. Prerequisite: 228 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials
Modern semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are based on
unique energy band, carrier transport, and optical properties of
semiconductor materials. How to choose these properties for
operation of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is on quantum
mechanical foundations of the properties of solids, energy bandgap
engineering, semi-classical transport theory, semi-conductor
statistics, carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport effects, high
field ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation, quantum
mechanical transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and nonradiative
recombination that are the foundations of modern
transistors and optoelectronic devices. Prerequisites: EE216 or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices
Principles governing the operation of modern semiconductor
devices. Assumptions and approximations commonly made in
analyzing devices. Emphasis is on the application of
semiconductor physics to the development of advanced
semiconductor devices such as heterojunctions, HJ-bipolar
transistors, HJ-FETs, nanostructures, tunneling, single electron
transistor and photonic devices. Use of SENTARUS, a 2-D
Poisson solver, for simulation of ultra-small devices. Examples
related to state-of-the-art devices and current device research.
Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.
3 units, Spr (Harris, J)
EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces
Physical concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques
probing the electronic and chemical structure of surfaces,
interfaces and nanomaterials. Microscopic and atomic models of
microstructures; applications including semiconductor device
technology, catalysis and energy. Physical processes of UV and Xray
photoemission spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy,
surface EXAFS, low energy electron diffraction, electron/photon
stimulated ion desorption, scanning tunneling spectroscopy, ion
scattering, energy loss spectroscopy and related imaging methods;
and experimental aspects of these surface science techniques.
Prerequisites: PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of
instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 331. Biophotonics: Light in Medicine and Biology
Current topics and trends in the use of light in medicine and for
advanced microscopy. Course begins with a review of relevant
optical principles (basic physics required). Key topics include:
light-tissue interactions; sensing and spectroscopy; contrastenhanced
imaging; super-resolution and label-free microscopy;
medical applications of light for diagnostics, in-vivo imaging, and
therapy; nanophotonics and array technologies. Open to nonmajors;
programming experience (Matlab and/or C) required.
3 units, Win (Ellerbee, A)
EE 334. Micro and Nano Optical Device Design
Lecture and project course on design and analysis of optical
devices with emphasis on opportunities and challenges created by
scaling to the micrometer and nanometer ranges. The emphasis is
on fundamentals, combined with some coverage of practical
implementations. Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent
3 units, not given this year
EE 336. Nanophotonics
(Same as MATSCI 346) Recent developments in micro- and
nanophotonic materials and devices. Basic concepts of photonic
crystals. Integrated photonic circuits. Photonic crystal fibers.
Superprism effects. Optical properties of metallic nanostructures.
Sub-wavelength phenomena and plasmonic excitations. Metamaterials.
Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.
3 units, Aut (Brongersma, M; Fan, S)
EE 340. Optical micro- and nano-cavities
Optical micro- and nano-cavities and their device applications.
Types of optical cavities (microdisks, microspheres, photonic
crystal cavities, plasmonic cavities), and their electromagnetic
properties, design, and fabrication techniques. Cavity quantum
electrodynamics: strong and weak-coupling regime, Purcell factor,
spontaneous emission control. Applications of optical cavities,
including low-threshold lasers, optical modulators, quantum
information processing devices, and bio-chemical sensors.
3 units, Spr (Vuckovic, J)
EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory
Lecture/lab emphasizing lab. Techniques in the 1MHz-1GHz range
useful in designing and measuring oscillators, amplifiers, and
mixers. High frequency measurement techniques including sparameter
measurements, amplifier noise figure, and oscillator
phase noise. Guest speakers from Lucent and Hewlett-Packard.
Enrollment limited to 25. Prerequisites: transmission lines, Smith
charts. Recommended: 314.
3 units, Aut (Scherer, D; Cox, D)
EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory
Experimental techniques in optical fiber communications and
networking. Experimental investigation of key optical
communications components including fibers, lasers, modulators,
photodiodes, optical amplifiers, and WDM multiplexers and
demultiplexers. Fundamental optical communications systems
techniques: eye diagrams, BER measurements, experimental
evaluation of nonlinearties. Prerequisites: Undergraduate physics
and optics.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics
Wave propagation in anisotropic, nonlinear, and time-varying
media. Microscopic and macroscopic description of electric dipole
susceptibilities. Free and forced waves-phasematching; slowly
varying envelope approximation-dispersion, diffraction, spacetime
analogy; harmonic generation; frequency conversion;
parametric amplification and oscillation; electro-optic light
modulation; nonlinear processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites:
141, 242.
3 units, not given this year
EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science
Design and understanding of modern optical systems. Topics:
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 653
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
geometrical optics; aberration theory; systems layout; applications
such as microscopes, telescopes, optical processors. Computer ray
tracing program as a design tool. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications
Optical amplifiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor
amplifiers. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. System applications:
preamplified receiver performance, amplifier chains. Raman
amplifiers, lumped vs. distributed amplification. Group-velocity
dispersion management: dispersion-compensating fibers, filters,
gratings. Interaction of dispersion and nonlinearity, dispersion
maps. Multichannel systems. Wavelength-division multiplexing
components: filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk. Time,
subcarrier, code and polarization-division multiplexing.
Comparison of modulation techniques: differential phase-shift
keying, phase-shift keying, quadrature-amplitude modulation.
Comparison of detection techniques: noncoherent, differentially
coherent, coherent. Prerequisite: 247.
3 units, Win (Kahn, J)
EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics
Coupled wave analysis of periodic structures, gratings structures
for optical communcations, wave-matter interactions with periodic
media and photonic crystals, applications of periodic structures.
Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications
(Same as GEOPHYS 265) Radar remote sensing, radar image
characteristics, viewing geometry, range coding, synthetic aperture
processing, correlation, range migration, range/Doppler
algorithms, wave domain algorithms, polar algorithm, polarimetric
processing, interferometric measurements. Applications: surfafe
deformation, polarimetry and target discrimination, topographic
mapping surface displacements, velocities of ice fields.
Prerequisites: EE261. Recommended: EE254, EE278B, EE279.
3 units, not given this year
EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and
Applications
Plasmas in nature and industry. Single particle motions. Plasma
kinetic theory. Boltzmann equation and its moments. Cold and
warm plasma models. Plasma as a fluid. Magnetohydrodynamics.
Plasma conductivity and diffusion. Langmuir oscillations. Debye
shielding. Plasma sheath. Waves in cold, magnetized, warm, and
hot plasmas. Electron and ion waves. MHD waves. Landau
damping. Nonlinear effects. Applications in industry and space
science. Prerequisite: 242 or PHYSICS 122.
3 units, not given this year
EE 359. Wireless Communications
This course will cover advanced topics in wireless
communications for voice, data, and multimedia. Topics include:
an overview of current and future wireless systems; wireless
channel models including path loss, shadowing, and statistical
multipath channel models; fundamental capacity limits of wireless
channels; digital modulation and its performance in fading and
intersymbol interference; techniques to combat fading including
adaptive modulation, diversity, and multiple antenna systems
(MIMO); techniques to combat intersymbol interference including
equalization, multicarrier modulation (OFDM), and spread
spectrum; and an overview of wireless network design.
Prerequisite: 279 or instructor consent.
3-4 units, Aut (Goldsmith, A)
EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks
Design, analysis, and fundamental limits. Topics include multiuser
channel capacity, multiple and random access techniques,
interference mitigation, cellular system design, ad hoc wireless
network design, sensor networks, green wireless networks,
cognitive radios, and cross-layer design. Prerequisite: EE 359.
3 units, Win (Goldsmith, A)
EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems
Continuation of 263. Optimal control and dynamic programming;
linear quadratic regulator. Lyapunov theory and methods. Linear
estimation and the Kalman filter. Perron-Frobenius theory.
Examples and applications from digital filters, circuits, signal
processing, and control systems. Prerequisites: 263 or equivalent;
basic probability.
3 units, not given this year
EE 364A. Convex Optimization I
(Same as CME 364A) Convex sets, functions, and optimization
problems. The basics of convex analysis and theory of convex
programming: optimality conditions, duality theory, theorems of
alternative, and applications. Least-squares, linear and quadratic
programs, semidefinite programming, and geometric
programming. Numerical algorithms for smooth and equality
constrained problems; interior-point methods for inequality
constrained problems. Applications to signal processing,
communications, control, analog and digital circuit design,
computational geometry, statistics, machine learning, and
mechanical engineering. Prerequisite: linear algebra such as
EE263, EE178/278A.
3 units, Win (Boyd, S)
EE 364B. Convex Optimization II
(Same as CME 364B) Continuation of 364. Subgradient, cuttingplane,
and ellipsoid methods. Decentralized convex optimization
via primal and dual decomposition. Exploiting problem structure in
implementation. Convex relaxations of hard problems. Global
optimization via branch and bound. Robust and stochastic
optimization. Applications in areas such as control, circuit design,
signal processing, and communications. Substantial project.
Prerequisite: 364A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics
Applications of Fourier theory to the analysis and synthesis of
optical imaging and optical data processing systems. Propagation
and diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer approximations,
Fourier transforming properties of lenses, image formation with
coherent and incoherent light, transform functions of imaging
systems, optical data processing, and holography. Prerequisite:
familiarity with Fourier analysis. Recommended: 261.
3 units, not given this year
EE 368. Digital Image Processing
Image sampling and quantization color, point operations,
segmentation, morphological image processing, linear image
filtering and correlation, image transforms, eigenimages,
multiresolution image processing, wavelets, noise reduction and
restoration, feature extraction and recognition tasks, image
registration. Emphasis is on the general principles of image
processing. Students write and investigate image processing
algorithms in Matlab. Term project. Prerequisites: EE261,
EE278B.
3 units, Spr (Girod, B)
EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I
Imaging internal structures within the body using high-energy
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities covered: xray,
computed tomography, and nuclear medicine. Analysis of
existing and proposed systems in terms of resolution, frequency
response, detection sensitivity, noise, and potential for improved
diagnosis. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, not given this year
EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II
Imaging internal structures within the body using non-ionizing
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities include
ultrasound and magnetic resonance. Analysis of ultrasonic systems
including diffraction and noise. Analysis of magnetic resonance
systems including physics, Fourier properties of image formation,
and noise. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, Spr (Nishimura, D)
EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction
Reconstruction problems from medical imaging, including
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT),
and positron emission tomography (PET). Problems include
reconstruction from non-uniform frequency domain data,
automatic deblurring, phase unwrapping, reconstruction from
incomplete data, and reconstruction from projections. Prerequisite:
369B.
3 units, Aut (Pauly, J)
EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design
Design of high-performance digital systems, the things that cause
them to fail, and how to avoid these problems. Topics will focus
654?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
on current issues including: wiring resistance and how to deal with
it, power and Gnd noise and regulation, clock (or asynchronous)
system design and how to minimize clocking overhead, high-speed
I/O design, energy minimization including leakage control, and
structuring your Verilog code to result in high-performance, low
energy systems. Extensive use of modern CAD tools.
Prerequisites: 271 and 313, or consent of instructor.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing
Learning algorithms for adaptive digital filters. Self optimization.
Wiener filter theory. Quadratic performance functions, their
eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Speed of convergence. Asymptotic
performance versus convergence rate. Applications of adaptive
filters to statistical prediction, process modeling, adaptive noise
canceling, adaptive antenna arrays, adaptive inverse control, and
equalization and echo cancelling in modems. Theoretical and
experimental research projects in adaptive filter theory,
communications, and audio systems. Biomedical research projects,
supervised jointly by EE and Medical School faculty.
Recommended: EE263, EE264, EE278B.
3 units, Win (Widrow, B)
EE 374. Inference in Graphical Models
Probabilistic models with sparse graphical structures, lowcomplexity
inference algorithms, and their analysis. Algorithmic
methods: variational inference; message passing algorithms; belief
propagation; generalized belief propagation; survey propagation.
Learning graphical models, structural learning.
Applications/examples include: Gaussian models with sparse
inverse covariance; hidden Markov models (Viterbi and BCJR
algorithms, Kalman filter); computer vision (segmentation,
tracking, etc); constraint satisfaction problems; machine learning
(clustering, classification); communications. Prerequisite:
EE178/EE278A, STATS 116, or CS 228. Recommended: 376A or
STATS 217/218.
3 units, not given this year
EE 376A. Information Theory
(Same as STATS 376A) The fundamental ideas of information
theory. Entropy and intrinsic randomness. Data compression to the
entropy limit. Huffman coding. Arithmetic coding. Channel
capacity, the communication limit. Gaussian channels.
Kolmogorov complexity. Asymptotic equipartition property.
Information theory and Kelly gambling. Applications to
communication and data compression. Prerequisite: EE178/278A
or STATS 116, or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Weissman, I)
EE 376B. Information Theory
(Same as STATS 376B) Rate distortion theory and Kolmogorov
complexity. Information theory and statistics. Method of types.
Stein's lemma. AEP. Information capacity of networks. Slepian-
Wolf theorem. Optimal investment and information theory.
Universal portfolios and universal data compression. Maximum
entropy and Burg's theorem. Prerequisite: EE376A.
3 units, Spr (Cover, T)
EE 378A. Statistical Signal Processing
Random signals in electrical engineering. Discrete-time random
processes: stationarity and ergodicity, covariance sequences,
power spectral density, parametric models for stationary processes.
Fundamentals of linear estimation: minimum mean squared error
estimation, optimum linear estimation, orthogonality principle, the
Wold decomposition. Causal linear estimation of stationary
processes: the causal Wiener filter, Kalman filtering. Parameter
estimation: criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher information,
Cramer-Rao inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality, maximum
likelihood estimation, method of moments, consistency, efficiency.
ARMA parameter estimation: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-
Durbin algorithm, least squares estimation, moving average
parameter estimation, modified Yule-Walker method for model
order selection. Spectrum estimation: sample covariances,
covariance estimation, Bartlett formula, periodogram, periodogram
averaging, windowed periodograms. Prerequisites: EE 278B
3 units, not given this year
EE 378B. Inference, Estimation, and Information Processing
Techniques and models for signal, data and information
processing, with emphasis on incomplete data, non-ordered index
sets and robust low-complexity methods. Linear models;
regularization and shrinkage; dimensionality reduction; streaming
algorithms; sketching; clustering, search in high dimension; lowrank
models; principal component analysis. Applications include:
positioning from pairwise distances; distributed sensing;
measurement/traffic monitoring in networks; finding
communities/clusters in networks; recommendation systems;
inverse problems. Prerequisites: EE278B and EE263 or equivalent.
Recommended but not required: EE378A
3 units, not given this year
EE 379. Digital Communication
Modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, baseband and
passband system analysis, minimum-probability-of-error and
maximum-likelihood detection, error-probability analysis,
intersymbol interference, maximum-likelihood sequence detection,
equalization methods, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing.
Prerequisite: EE102B, EE278B
3 units, NEXTYEAR
EE 380. Colloquium on Computer Systems
Live presentations of current research in the design,
implementation, analysis, and applications of computer systems.
Topics range over a wide range and are different every quarter.
Topics may include fundamental science, mathematics,
cryptography, device physics, integrated circuits, computer
architecture, programming, programming languages, optimization,
applications, simulation, graphics, social implications, venture
capital, patent and copyright law, networks, computer security, and
other topics of related to computer systems.
1 unit, Aut (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Win (Allison, D; Freeman,
J), Spr (Allison, D; Freeman, J)
EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture
Provides in-depth coverage of fundamental architecture and
implementation techniques for modern processor chips. Course
covers topics such as advanced pipelining, superscalar execution,
out-of-order processing, speculative execution, VLIW, data
parallelism, multithreading, graphics processors, and multi-core
chips. The students will become familiar with complex trade-offs
between performance-power-complexity and the common
techniques for addressing the challenges in historical and modern
processors. A central part of EE382A is a group project on an open
research question. Prerequisites: EE108B, CS140. Recommended:
EE282, CS315A
3 units, not given this year
EE 382C. Interconnection Networks
The architecture and design of interconnection networks used to
communicate from processor to memory, from processor to
processor, and in switches and routers. Topics: network topology,
routing methods, flow control, router microarchitecture, and
performance analysis. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards
Local area networks addressing and switching; IEEE 802.1
bridging protocols (transparent bridging, virtual LANs). Internet
routing protocols: interior gateways (RIP, OSPF) and exterior
gateways (BGP); multicast routing; multiprotocol label switching
(MPLS). Routing in mobile networks: Mobile IP, Mobile Ad Hoc
Networks (MANET), Wireless Mesh Networks. Prerequisite: 284
or CS 144.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet
Applications and requirements. Traffic generation and
characterization: voice encoding (G.711, G.729, G.723); image
and video compression (JPEG, H.261, MPEG-2, H.263, H.264),
TCP data traffic. Quality impairments and measures. Networking
technologies: LAN technologies; home broadband services
(ADSL, cable modems, PONs); and wireless LANs (802.11).
Network protocols for multimedia applications: resource
reservation (ST2+, RSVP); differentiated services (DiffServ); and
real-time transport protocol (RTP, RTCP). Audio-video-data
conferencing standards: Internet architecture (SDP, SAP, SIP);
ITU recommendations (H.320, H.323 and T.120); and real-time
streaming protocol (RTSP). Emphasis will be placed on advances
in network infrastructure and new services (VoIP, IPTV, Peer-topeer
communications, etc.) Prerequisite: 284 or CS 144.
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12?? | 655
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
Recommended: 384A.
3 units, Spr (Tobagi, F)
EE 384C. Wireless Local and Wide Area Networks
Characteristics of wireless communication: multipath, noise, and
interference. Communications techniques: spread-spectrum,
CDMA, and OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical layer specifications:
FHSS, DSSS, IEEE 802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g (OFDM).
IEEE 802.11 media access control protocols: carrier sense multiple
access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), point coordination
function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated services. IEEE
802.11 network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure modes,
access point functionality. Management functions:
synchronization, power management and association. IEEE
802.11s Mesh Networks. IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX) network
architecture and protocols: Physical Layer (OFDMA) and Media
Access Control Layer. Current research papers in the open
literature. Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 384E. Networked Wireless Systems
(Same as CS 244E) Design and implementation of wireless
networks and mobile systems. The course will commence with a
short retrospective of wireless communication and initially touch
on some of the fundamental physical layer properties of various
wireless communication technologies. The focus will then shift to
design of media access control and routing layers for various
wireless systems. The course will also examine adaptations
necessary at transport and higher layers to cope with node mobility
and error-prone nature of the wireless medium. Finally, it will
conclude with a brief overview of other related issues including
emerging wireless/mobile applications. Prerequisites: EE 284
3 units, Win (Katti, S)
EE 384M. Network Science
Modern large-scale networks consist of (i) Information Networks,
such as the Web and Social Networks, and (ii) Data Centers, which
are networks interconnecting computing and storage elements for
servicing the users of an Information Network. This course is
concerned with the mathematical models and the algorithms used
in Information Networks and Data Centers. Prerequisite:
EE178/278A or CS365.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384S. Performance Engineering of Computer Systems &
Networks
Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance
network engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic
modeling, queueing networks and congestion management,
dynamic programming and task/processor scheduling, network
dimensioning and optimization, and simulation methods.
Applications for design of high-performance architectures for
wireline/wireless networks and the Internet, including: traffic
modeling, admission and congestion control, quality of service
support, power control in wireless networks, packet scheduling in
switches, video streaming over wireless links, and virus/worm
propagation dynamics and countermeasures. Enrollment limited to
30. Prerequisites: basic networking technologies and probability.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures
The theory and practice of designing packet switches, such as
Internet routers, and Ethernet switches. Introduction: evolution of
switches and routers. Output queued switches: motivation and
methods for providing bandwidth and delay guarantees. Switching:
output queueing, parallelism in switches, distributed shared
memory switches, input-queued switches, combined input-output
queued switches, how to make fast packet buffers, buffered
crossbar switches. Scheduling input queued crossbars: connections
with bipartite graph matching, algorithms for 100% throughput,
practical algorithms and heuristics. Looking forward: Architectures
and switches for data center networks. Prerequisites: EE284 or CS
244A. Recommended: EE 178/278A or EE 278B or STAT 116.
3 units, Spr (Prabhakar, B; McKeown, N)
EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar
Student/faculty discussions of research problems in the design of
reliable digital systems. Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for
testability, production testing, and system reliability. Emphasis is
on student presentations and Ph.D. thesis research. May be
repeated for credit. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
1-4 units, Aut (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Win (McCluskey, E;
Mitra, S), Spr (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S)
EE 386. Robust System Design
Causes of system malfunctions; techniques for building robust
systems that avoid or are resilient to such malfunctions through
built-in error detection and correction, prediction, self-test, selfrecovery,
and self-repair; case studies and new research problems.
Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes
Theory and implementation of algebraic codes for detection and
correction of random and burst errors. Introduction to finite fields.
Linear block codes, cyclic codes, Hamming codes, BCH codes,
Reed-Solomon codes. Decoding algorithms for BCH and Reed-
Solomon codes. Prerequisites: elementary probability, linear
algebra.
3 units, not given this year
EE 388. Modern Coding Theory
Tools for analysis and optimization of iterative coding systems.
LDPC, turbo and, RA codes. Optimized ensembles, message
passing algorithms, density evolution, and analytic techniques.
Prerequisite: 376A.
3 units, Spr (Montanari, A)
EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member.
Individual or team activities may involve lab experimentation,
design of devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S), Sum
(Staff)
EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written
report or written examination required. Letter grade given on the
basis of the report; if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S), Sum
(Staff)
EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits
Similar to former 318. Solving logic design problems with CAD
tools for VLSI circuits. Exact and heuristic algorithms for logic
synthesis. Representation and optimization of combinational logic
functions (encoding problems, binary decision diagrams) and of
multiple-level networks (algebraic and Boolean methods, don'tcare
set computation, timing verification, and optimization);and
modeling and optimization of sequential functions and networks
(retiming), semicustom libraries, and library binding. Prerequisites:
familiarity with logic design, algorithm development, and
programming.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392J. Digital Video Processing
Spatio-temporal sampling, motion analysis, parametric motion
models, motion-compensated filtering, and video processing
operations including noise reduction, restoration, superresolution,
deinterlacing and video sampling structure conversion, and
compression (frame-based and object-based methods). Video
segmentation and layered video representations, video streaming,
compressed-domain video processing, and digital TV. Prerequisite:
368.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392N. INTELLIGENT ENERGY SYSTEMS
The key systems engineering steps for design of automated
systems in application to of existing and future intelligent energy
systems. Existing design approaches and practices for the energy
systems. Every second lecture of the course will be a guest lecture
discussing the communication system design for a certain type of
energy system. They will alternate with guest lectures discuss-ing
the on-line analytical functions.
1 unit, not given this year
EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug
Seminars by industry professionals in digital IC manufacturing test
and silicon debug. Topics include yield and binsplit modeling,
defect types and detection, debug hardware, physical analysis, and
design for test/debug circuits. Case studies of silicon failures.
Prerequisite: basic digital IC design (271 or 371).
656?? |?? STANFORD BULLETIN, 2011-12
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
1 unit, Win (Stinson, J)
EE 392V. Signal Processing in VoIP Systems
VoIP protocols: RTP and SIP. Voice encoding standards: PCM,
ADPCM, and LPC. Speech quality measurement: MOS, PESQ,
and E-model. Characterization of VoIP impairments: delay, jitter,
packet loss, and clock skew. Signal processing algorithms to
improve VoIP quality: echo cancellation, adaptive jitter buffering,
packet loss concealment, and decoder clock synchronization.
Prerequisites: EE261 and EE278B, or equivalents.
3 units, not given this year
EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching
Open to advanced EE graduate students who plan to make teaching
their career. Students conduct a section of an established course
taught in parallel by an experienced instructor. Enrollment limited.
1-15 units, Aut (Nishimura, D), Win (Staff), Spr (Nishimura, D)
EE 398A. Image and Video Compression
Replaces EE398. The principles of source coding for the efficient
storage and transmission of still and moving images. Entropy and
lossless coding techniques. Run-length coding and fax
compression. Arithmetic coding. Rate-distortion limits and
quantization. Lossless and lossy predictive coding. Transform
coding, JPEG. Subband coding, wavelets, JPEG2000. Motioncompensated
coding, MPEG. Students investigate image and video
compression algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project.
Prerequisites: EE261, EE278B.
3 units, Win (Girod, B)
EE 398B. Advanced Topics in Image, Video, and Multimedia
Systems
Replaces previous EE398B Image Communication II. Lectures on
selected advanced topics, given by instructor, staff, and invited
speakers from industry and academia. Emphasis on systems
aspects. Topics covered depend on students' interest. Relevant
topics include, but are not limited to: videoconferencing,
telepresence, digital TV broadcasting, HDTV, 3-d television,
digital cinema, audio and video streaming over the Internet, IPTV,
peer-to-peer media delivery, mobile media delivery, mobile
augmented reality, content-based retrieval, visual search, image
and video databases. Students implement and investigate advanced
algorithms for image, video, and multimedia signal processing and
communication. Term project.
3 units, not given this year
EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research
Limited to candidates for the degree of Engineer or Ph.D.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S), Sum
(Staff)
EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management
Theme for Autumn 2011 is Mobile Internet Technologies and
Businesses in Asia. Recent innovations in location based services,
mobile online games, payment solutions, etc., and challenges such
as privacy, business models, and differing regulatory regimes in
major Asian economies. Implications for US firms and researchers.
1 unit, Aut (Dasher, R)
EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology
Research
Theme for Spring 2011 is Recent Approaches to Chip-Level
Integration. Survey of advanced research into 3D integration,
CMOS on encapsulated MEMS, III-V on Si, multi-processor
architectures, etc. Distinguished speakers from industry and
universities. May be repeated for credit. Recommended: basic
electronics.
1 unit, not given this year
EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries
Distinctive patterns and challenges of entrepreneurship in Asia;
update of business and technology issues in the creation and
growth of start-up companies in major Asian economies.
Distinguished speakers from industry, government, and academia.
1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)
EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory
Fabrication, simulation, and testing of a submicron CMOS process.
Practical aspects of IC fabrication including silicon wafer cleaning,
photolithography, etching, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation,
chemical vapor deposition, physical sputtering, and electrical
testing. Students also simulate the CMOS process using process
simulator TSUPREM4 of the structures and electrical parameters
that should result from the process flow. Taught in the Stanford
Nanofabrication Facility (SNF). Preference to students pursuing
doctoral research program requiring SNF facilities. Enrollment
limited to 20. Prerequisites: 212, 216, consent of instructor.
3-4 units, Win (Saraswat, K)
EE 412. Advanced Nanofabrication Laboratory
Experimental projects and seminars on integrated circuit
fabrication using epitaxial, oxidation, diffusion, evaporation,
sputtering, and photolithographic processes with emphasis on
techniques for achieving advanced device performance. May be
repeated for additional credit. Prerequisites: ENGR341 or EE410
or consent of instructor.
3 units, Aut (Howe, R), Spr (Solgaard, O)
EE 414. RF Transceiver Design Laboratory
Students design, build, and test GHz transceivers using microstrip
construction techniques and discrete components. The design,
construction, and experimental characterization of representative
transceiver building blocks: low noise amplifiers (LNAs), diode
ring mixers, PLL-based frequency synthesizers, voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs), power amplifiers (PAs), and microstrip filters
and patch antennas. The characteristics of passive microstrip
components (including interconnect). Emphasis is on a quantitative
reconciliation of theoretical predictions and extensive experimental
measurements performed with spectrum and network analyzers,
time-domain reflectometers (TDRs), noise figure meter and phase
noise analyzers. Prerequisites: EE 314, EE 344.
3 units, not given this year
EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering
Neuroscience and electrical engineering, focusing on principles
and theory in modern neural prosthetic systems (brain-computer or
brain-machine interfaces). Electrical properties of neurons,
information encoding, neural measurement techniques and
technology, processing electronics, information decoding and
estimators, and statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: EE 214B,
EE 278B.
3 units, not given this year
EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS)
based on the use of radio frequency pulses to manipulate
magnetization. Analysis and design of major types of RF pulses in
one and multiple dimensions, analysis and design of sequences of
RF pulses for fast imaging, and use of RF pulses for the creation of
image contrast in MRI. Prerequisite: 369B.
3 units, not given this year
EE 476. Network Information Theory
Network information theory deals with the fundamental limits on
information flow in networks and the optimal coding schemes that
achieve these limits. It aims to extend Shannon's point-to-point
information theory and the Ford-Fulkerson max-flow min-cut
theorem to networks with multiple sources and destinations. The
course presents the basic results and tools in the field in a simple
and unified manner. Topics covered include: multiple access
channels, broadcast channels, interference channels, channels with
state, distributed source coding, multiple description coding,
network coding, relay channels, interactive communication, and
noisy network coding. Prerequisites: EE376A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory
Universal schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel
coding and decoding, prediction, denoising, and filtering.
Characterization of performance limitations in the stochastic
settting: entropy rate, rate-distortion function, channel capacity,
Bayes envelope for prediction, denoising, and filtering. Lempel-
Ziv lossless compression, and Lempel-Ziv based schemes for lossy
compression, channel coding, prediction, and filtering. Discrete
universal denoising. Compression-based approach to denoising.
The compound deci