































Graduate courses in Electrical Engineering


skip to content


 Registrar's Office
Stanford Bulletin, Archive 2008-09


	
		
	
		Search:
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	


	
 Stanford Bulletin, Archive 2008-09



	 


Stanford Bulletin

Accreditation

Nondiscrimination Policy

Additional Information



Academic Calendar 2008-09

Welcome to Stanford

A Brief History of Stanford

University Governance and Organization

Directory

Organization

Admission

Undergraduate Admission

Graduate Admission

Financial Aid

Undergraduate Financial Aid

Graduate Financial Aid

Tuition and Fees

Tuition

Fees

Housing

Meal Plans

Payments

Refunds

Housing

Undergraduate Residences

Graduate Residences

Community Housing

Undergraduate Degrees and Programs

Degree Programs

Degree Requirements

Degrees, Honors, and Minors

Special Registration Statuses (Undergraduate)

Graduate Degrees

General Requirements

Degree-Specific Requirements

Advising and Credentials

Advising

Teaching Credentials

Academic Policies and Statements

Registration and Records

Examinations

Grading Systems

Academic Standing

Statement on Student Academic Grievance Procedures

Undergraduate Education

Center for Teaching and Learning

Freshman and Sophomore Programs

Freshman Dean’s Office

Introduction to the Humanities Program

Overseas Studies Program

Structured Liberal Education

Program in Writing and Rhetoric

Undergraduate Advising and Research

Graduate Education

Graduate Policy

Graduate School of Business

School of Earth Sciences

Degree Programs in Earth Sciences

Earth, Energy, and Environmental Sciences Graduate Program (EEES)

Earth Systems

Energy Resources Engineering

Environmental Earth System Science

Geological and Environmental Sciences

Geophysics

Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Environment and Resources (IPER)

School of Education

Undergraduate Programs in Education

Graduate Programs in Education

School of Engineering

Undergraduate Programs in the School of Engineering

Graduate Programs in the School of Engineering

Aeronautics and Astronautics

Bioengineering

Chemical Engineering

Civil and Environmental Engineering

Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering

Computer Science

Electrical Engineering

Management Science and Engineering

Materials Science and Engineering

Mechanical Engineering

Mechanical Engineering Course Catalog Numbering System

School of Humanities and Sciences

African and African American Studies

African Studies

American Studies

Anthropology

Applied Physics

Archaeology

Art and Art History

Asian Languages

Astronomy

Athletics, Physical Education, and Recreation

Biology

Biology, Hopkins Marine Station

Biophysics

Chemistry*

Classics

Communication

Comparative Literature

Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity (CSRE)

Drama

East Asian Studies

Economics

English

Ethics in Society Program

Feminist Studies

Financial Mathematics

French and Italian

German Studies

History

History and Philosophy of Science and Technology

Human Biology

Individually Designed Majors

Interdisciplinary Studies in Humanities

Division of International Comparative and Area Studies

International Policy Studies

International Relations

Jewish Studies

Language Center

Latin American Studies

Linguistics

Division of Literatures, Cultures, and Languages

Mathematical and Computational Science

Mathematics

Medieval Studies

Modern Thought and Literature

Music

Philosophy

Physics

Political Science

Psychology

Public Policy

Religious Studies

Russian, East European and Eurasian Studies

Science, Technology, and Society

Slavic Languages and Literatures

Sociology

Spanish and Portuguese

Statistics

Symbolic Systems

Urban Studies

Stanford in Washington

School of Law

Joint and Dual Degrees in Law

Courses in Law

School of Medicine

Undergraduate Programs in the School of Medicine

Graduate Programs in the School of Medicine

Biochemistry

Center for Biomedical Ethics

Biomedical Informatics

Cancer Biology

Chemical and Systems Biology

Comparative Medicine

Developmental Biology

Genetics

Health Research and Policy

Immunology

Microbiology and Immunology

Molecular and Cellular Physiology

Neurobiology

Neurosciences

Obstetrics and Gynecology

Pathology

Radiation Oncology

Radiology

Structural Biology

COURSES OF INSTRUCTION

Aeronautics and Astronautics (AA) Courses

African and African American Studies (AFRICAAM) Courses

African and Middle Eastern Languages (AMELANG) Courses

African Studies (AFRICAST) Courses

American Studies (AMSTUD) Courses

Anesthesia (ANES) Courses

Anthropology (ANTHRO) Courses

Applied Linguistics (APPLLING) Courses

Applied Physics (APPPHYS) Courses

Archaeology (ARCHLGY) Courses

Art History (ARTHIST) Courses

Art Studio (ARTSTUDI) Courses

Asian American Studies (ASNAMST) Courses

Astronomy (ASTRNMY) Courses

Athletics, Physical Education, and Recreation (ATHLETIC) Courses

Biochemistry (BIOC) Courses

Bioengineering (BIOE) Courses

Biology (BIO) Courses

Biology, Hopkins Marine Station (BIOHOPK) Courses

Biomedical Informatics (BIOMEDIN) Courses

Biophysics (BIOPHYS) Courses

Catalan Language (CATLANG) Courses

Cancer Biology (CBIO) Courses

Center for Teaching and Learning (CTL) Courses

Chemical Engineering (CHEMENG) Courses

Chemical and Systems Biology (CSB) Courses

Chemistry (CHEM) Courses

Chicana/o Studies (CHICANST) Courses

Chinese General (CHINGEN) Courses

Chinese Language (CHINLANG) Courses

Chinese Literature (CHINLIT) Courses

Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) Courses

Classics Art/Archaeology (CLASSART) Courses

Classics General (CLASSGEN) Courses

Classics Greek (CLASSGRK) Courses

Classics History (CLASSHIS) Courses

Classics Latin (CLASSLAT) Courses

Communication (COMM) Courses

Comparative Literature (COMPLIT) Courses

Comparative Medicine (COMPMED) Courses

Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity (CSRE) Courses

Computational and Mathematical Engineering (CME) Courses

Computer Science (CS) Courses

Dance (DANCE) Courses

Developmental Biology (DBIO) Courses

Division of Literatures, Cultures, and Languages (DLCL) Courses

Drama (DRAMA) Courses

Earth, Energy, and Environmental Sciences (EEES) Courses

Earth Systems (EARTHSYS) Courses

East Asian Studies (EASTASN) Courses

Economics (ECON) Courses

Education (EDUC) Courses

Electrical Engineering (EE) Courses

Energy Resources Engineering (ENERGY) Courses

Engineering (ENGR) Courses

English (ENGLISH) Courses

English for Foreign Students (EFSLANG) Courses

Environmental Earth System Science (EESS) Courses

Ethics in Society (ETHICSOC) Courses

Feminist Studies (FEMST) Courses

Film Studies (FILMSTUD) Courses

Film, Practice of (FILMPROD) Courses

French General (FRENGEN) Courses

French Language (FRENLANG) Courses

French Literature (FRENLIT) Courses

Genetics (GENE) Courses

Geological and Environmental Sciences (GES) Courses

Geophysics (GEOPHYS) Courses

German General (GERGEN) Courses

German Language (GERLANG) Courses

German Literature (GERLIT) Courses

Graduate School of Business (GSBGEN) Courses

Health Research and Policy (HRP) Courses

History (HISTORY) Courses

History and Philosophy of Science (HPS) Courses

Human Biology (HUMBIO) Courses

Humanities and Sciences (HUMSCI) Courses

Immunology (IMMUNOL) Courses

Institute for International Studies (Freeman Spogli) (IIS) Courses

Interdisciplinary Program in Environment and Resources (IPER) Courses

Interdisciplinary Studies in Humanities (HUMNTIES) Courses

International Policy Studies (IPS) Courses

International Relations (INTNLREL) Courses

Introduction to the Humanities (IHUM) Courses

Italian General (ITALGEN) Courses

Italian Language (ITALLANG) Courses

Italian Literature (ITALLIT) Courses

Japanese General (JAPANGEN) Courses

Japanese Language (JAPANLNG) Courses

Japanese Literature (JAPANLIT) Courses

Jewish Studies (JEWISHST) Courses

Korean Language (KORLANG) Courses

Latin American Studies (LATINAM) Courses

Law (LAW) Courses

Law, Nonprofessional (LAWGEN) Courses

Linguistics (LINGUIST) Courses

Management Science and Engineering (MS&E) Courses

Master of Liberal Arts (MLA) Courses

Materials Science and Engineering (MATSCI) Courses

Mathematical and Computational Science (MCS) Courses

Mathematics (MATH) Courses

Mechanical Engineering (ME) Courses

Medicine (MED) Courses

Medicine Interdisciplinary (INDE) Courses

Medieval Studies (MEDVLST) Courses

Microbiology and Immunology (MI) Courses

Modern Thought and Literature (MTL) Courses

Molecular and Cellular Physiology (MCP) Courses

Music (MUSIC) Courses

Native American Studies (NATIVEAM) Courses

Neurobiology (NBIO) Courses

Neurology and Neurological Sciences (NENS) Courses

Neurosciences Program (NEPR) Courses

Neurosurgery (NSUR) Courses

Obstetrics and Gynecology (OBGYN) Courses

Ophthalmology (OPHT) Courses

Orthopedic Surgery (ORTHO) Courses

Overseas Studies Special Programs (OSPGEN) Courses

Overseas Studies: Australia (OSPAUSTL) Courses

Overseas Studies: Beijing (OSPBEIJ) Courses

Overseas Studies: Berlin (OSPBER) Courses

Overseas Studies: Florence (OSPFLOR) Courses

Overseas Studies: Kyoto—SCTI (OSPKYOTO) Courses

Overseas Studies: Madrid (OSPMADRD) Courses

Overseas Studies: Moscow (OSPMOSC) Courses

Overseas Studies: Oxford (OSPOXFRD) Courses

Overseas Studies: Paris (OSPPARIS) Courses

Overseas Studies: Santiago (OSPSANTG) Courses

Pathology (PATH) Courses

Pediatrics (PEDS) Courses

Philosophy (PHIL) Courses

Physics (PHYSICS) Courses

Political Science (POLISCI) Courses

Portuguese Language (PORTLANG) Courses

Portuguese Literature (PORTLIT) Courses

Psychiatry (PSYC) Courses

Psychology (PSYCH) Courses

Public Policy (PUBLPOL) Courses

Radiation Oncology (RADO) Courses

Radiology (RAD) Courses

Religious Studies (RELIGST) Courses

Russian, East European, and Eurasian Studies (REES) Courses

Science, Technology, and Society (STS) Courses

Slavic General (SLAVGEN) Courses

Slavic Language (SLAVLANG) Courses

Slavic Literature (SLAVLIT) Courses

Sociology (SOC) Courses

Sophomore College (SCS) Courses

Spanish Language (SPANLANG) Courses

Spanish Literature (SPANLIT) Courses

Special Language Program (SPECLANG) Courses

Stanford Introductory Seminars (IDS, ISF, ISS) Courses

Statistics (STATS) Courses

Structural Biology (SBIO) Courses

Structured Liberal Education (SLE) Courses

Surgery (SURG) Courses

Symbolic Systems (SYMBSYS) Courses

Tibetan Language (TIBETLNG) Courses

Urban Studies (URBANST) Courses

Writing and Rhetoric, Program in (PWR) Courses

Centers, Laboratories, and Institutes

Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS)

Center for History and Philosophy of Science

Center for Space Science and Astrophysics

Edward L. Ginzton Laboratory

Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies (FSI)

Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials (GLAM)

Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace

Human Sciences and Technologies Advanced Research Institute (H-STAR)

Institute for Research in the Social Sciences (IRiSS)

Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology (KIPAC)

Michelle R. Clayman Institute for Gender Research

Morrison Institute for Population and Resource Studies

Photon Ultrafast Laser Science and Engineering (PULSE)

Precourt Institute for Energy Efficiency (PIEE)

Stanford Center on Longevity (SCL)

Stanford Humanities Center

Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR)

Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences (SIMES)

Stanford Institute for the Quantitative Study of Society

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center

W. W. Hansen Experimental Physics Laboratory (HEPL)

Woods Institute for the Environment

Libraries and Computing Resources

Stanford University Libraries and Academic Information Resources

Coordinate Libraries

Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace

Information Technology Services (IT Services)

The Continuing Studies Program

Master of Liberal Arts Program

Summer Session

Student Affairs

Dean of Student Life

Dean of Educational Resources

Office of Accessible Education (OAE)

Career Development Center

Community Centers

Graduate Life Office

Haas Center for Public Service

Bechtel International Center

Judicial Affairs and Student Conduct

Old Union

Office of Residential Education

Office of Student Activities

Tresidder Memorial Union

Vaden Health Center

Other Services and Programs

Bookstore

Diversity and Access Office

Stanford Conference Services

Ombuds

Police Services

Office for Religious Life

Stanford Alumni Association

Stanford Events

Awards and Honors

Exchange Programs and Cross-enrollment Agreements

Nonacademic Regulations

University Policies

Index


Alphabetical Index






	

	
      Bulletin Archive 

      This archived information is dated to the 2008-09 academic year only and may no longer be current.

      For currently applicable policies and information, see the current Stanford Bulletin.

    


		Graduate courses in Electrical Engineering

	
In this section:
EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer
EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes
EE 214. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design
EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices
EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I
EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II
EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics
EE 231. Introduction to Lasers
EE 232. Laser Dynamics
EE 234. Photonics Laboratory
EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices
EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves
EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices
EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications
EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes
EE 249. Introduction to the Space Environment
EE 252. Antennas for Telecommunications and Remote Sensing
EE 256. Numerical Electromagnetics
EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications
EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging
EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems
EE 264. Digital Signal Processing
EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory
EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics
EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems
EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering
EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications
EE 278. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing
EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems
EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture
EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks
EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains
EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
EE 300. Master's Thesis and Thesis Research
EE 302. Topics in Biomedical Electronics
EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology
EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar
EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes
EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators
EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits
EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design
EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits
EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices
EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits
EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology
EE 320. Nanoelectronics
EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics
EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials
EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices
EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces
EE 335. Introduction to Information Storage Systems
EE 336. Nanophotonics
EE 340. Advanced Topics in Optics and Quantum Optics
EE 343. Advanced Optoelectronic Devices
EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory
EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory
EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics
EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science
EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications
EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics
EE 350. STARLab Seminar
EE 353. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer Scientists
EE 354. Introduction to Radio Wave Scattering
EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications
EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and Applications
EE 359. Wireless Communication
EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks
EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems
EE 364A. Convex Optimization I
EE 364B. Convex Optimization II
EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics
EE 368. Digital Image Processing
EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I
EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II
EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction
EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design
EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing
EE 373B. Adaptive Neural Networks
EE 375. Quantization Noise
EE 376A. Information Theory
EE 376B. Information Theory
EE 378. Statistical Signal Processing
EE 379A. Digital Communication I
EE 379C. Advanced Digital Communication
EE 380. Seminar on Computer Systems
EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture
EE 382C. Interconnection Networks
EE 382D. Advanced Computer Arithmetic
EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards
EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet
EE 384C. Wireless Local Area Networks
EE 384M. Network Algorithms
EE 384S. Network Architectures and Performance Engineering
EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures I
EE 384Y. Packet Switch Architectures II
EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar
EE 386. Robust System Design
EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes
EE 388. Modern Coding Theory
EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
EE 392B. Introduction to Imaging Sensors
EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits
EE 392G. Terahertz Technologies and Applications
EE 392H. Coding for Wireless Channels
EE 392R. Charged Particle Optics
EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug
EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching
EE 398A. Image Communication I
EE 398B. Image Communication II
EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research
EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management
EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology Research
EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries
EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory
EE 414. RF Transceiver Design Laboratory
EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering
EE 453. Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation
EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory
EE 478. Topics in Multiple User Information Theory
EE 479. Multiuser Digital Transmission Systems
EE 492M. Space-Time Wireless Communications
	
Up one level:
Electrical Engineering (EE) Courses



Primarily for graduate students; undergraduates may enroll with consent of instructor.


EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer

Seminar. For prospective entrepreneurs with an engineering background. Contributions made to the business world by engineering graduates. Speakers include Stanford and other engineering and M.B.A. graduates who have founded large and small companies in nearby communities. Contributions from EE faculty and other departments including Law, Business, and MS&E.

1 unit, Win (Melen, R)

EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes

For students interested in the physical bases and practical methods of silicon VLSI chip fabrication, or the impact of technology on device and circuit design, or intending to pursue doctoral research involving the use of Stanford's Nanofabrication laboratory. Process simulators illustrate concepts and provide a virtual lab experience. Topics: principles of integrated circuit fabrication processes, physical and chemical models for crystal growth, oxidation, ion implantation, etching, deposition, lithography, and back-end processing. Required for 410.

3 units, Aut (Plummer, J)

EE 214. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design

Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits in advanced MOS and bipolar technologies. Device operation and compact modeling in support of circuit simulations needed for design. Emphasis is on quantitative evaluations of performance using hand calculations and circuit simulations; intuitive approaches to design. Analytical and approximate treatments of noise and distortion; analysis and design of feedback circuits. Design of archetypal analog blocks for networking and communications such as broadband gain stages and transimpedance amplifiers. Prerequisite: 114.

3 units, Win (Murmann, B; Wooley, B)

EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices

Carrier generation, transport, recombination, and storage in semiconductors. Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction, heterojunction, metal semiconductor contact, bipolar junction transistor, MOS capacitor, MOS and junction field-effect transistors, and related optoelectronic devices such as CCDs, solar cells, LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models that reflect physical principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis and design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.

3 units, Aut (Harris, J), Win (Saraswat, K; Howe, R)

EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I

Emphasis is on applications in modern devices and systems. Topics include: SchrÃ¶dinger's equation, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, operator approach to quantum mechanics, Dirac notation, solutions of simple problems including quantum wells and tunneling. Quantum harmonic oscillator, coherent states. Calculation techniques including matrix diagonalization, perturbation theory, and variational method. Time-dependent perturbation theory, applications to optical absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and Fermi's golden rule. Quantum mechanics in crystalline materials. Prerequisites: MATH 52 and 53, PHYSICS 65 (or PHYSICS 43 and 45).

3 units, Aut (Miller, D)

EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II

Continuation of 222, including more advanced topics: angular momentum in quantum mechanics, spin, hydrogen atom, systems of identical particles (bosons and fermions), methods for one-dimensional problems, introductory quantum optics (electromagnetic field quantization, coherent states), fermion annihilation and creation operators, interaction of different kinds of particles (spontaneous emission, optical absorption, and stimulated emission). Quantum information and interpretation of quantum mechanics. Other topics in electronics, optoelectronics, optics, and quantum information science. Prerequisite: 222.

3 units, Win (Miller, D)

EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics

Topics: energy band theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering, classical kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and non-equilibrium semiconductor statistics. Prerequisite: course in modern physics.

3 units, Aut (Peumans, P)

EE 231. Introduction to Lasers

How lasers work, including quantum transitions in atoms, stimulated emission and amplification, rate equations, saturation, feedback, coherent optical oscillation, laser resonators, and optical beams. Limited primarily to steady-state behavior; classical models for atomic transitions with little quantum mechanics background required. Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory to the level of 142, preferably 241, and some atomic or modern physics such as PHYSICS 70 or 130, 131.

3 units, Win (Digonnet, M)

EE 232. Laser Dynamics

Continuation of 231, emphasizing dynamic and transient effects including spiking, Q-switching, mode locking, frequency modulation, frequency and spatial mode competition, linear and nonlinear pulse propagation, short pulse expansion, and compression. Prerequisite: 231.

3 units, Spr (Fan, S)

EE 234. Photonics Laboratory

Photonics and fiber optics with a focus on communication and sensing. Experimental characterization of semiconductor lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Prerequisite: 142.

3 units, Win (Vuckovic, J)

EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices

Guided wave optics, optical waveguide devices, and integrated optics. Wave propagation in layered media, slab waveguides, and optical fibers. Rectangular waveguides. Optical waveguide technology. Coupled-mode theory. Numerical analysis of complex waveguides. Photonic crystals. Physics and design of waveguide devices. Fiber sensors, waveguide gratings, waveguide modulators, directional couplers, ring filters. Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory to the level of 142 or equivalent.

3 units, Aut (Fan, S)

EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves

Continuation of 141. Maxwell's equations. Plane waves in lossless and lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of electromagnetic power. Poynting's theorem. Reflection and refraction of waves at planar boundaries. Snell's law and total internal reflection. Reflection and refraction from lossy media. Guided waves. Parallel-plate and dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow wave-guides, cavity resonators, microstrip waveguides, optical fibers. Interaction of fields with matter and particles. Antennas and radiation of electromagnetic energy. Prerequisite: 141 or PHYSICS 120.

3 units, Win (Inan, U)

EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices

Semiconductor physics and optical processes in semiconductors. Operating principles and practical device features of semiconductor optoelectronic materials and heterostructures. Devices include: optical detectors (p-i-n, avalanche, and MSM); light emitting diodes; electroabsorptive modulators (Franz-Keldysh and QCSE), electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-Zehnder), switches (SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical cavity surface emitting). Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and solid state physics such as EE 216 and 228 or equivalents. Recommended: basic quantum mechanics and lasers such as EE 216 and 231 or equivalents.

3 units, Win (Harris, J)

EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications

Fibers: single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion, group-velocity dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear effects in fibers: Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase modulation, four-wave mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes, laser diodes, transverse and longitudinal mode control, modulation, chirp, linewidth, intensity noise. Modulators: electro-optic, electro-absorption. Photodiodes: p-i-n, avalanche, responsivity, capacitance, transit time. Receivers: high-impedance, transimpedance, bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation formats: non-return-to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance: Q factor, bit-error ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity degradations: extinction ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion. Wavelength-division multiplexing. System architectures: local-area, access, metropolitan-area, long-haul. Prerequisites: 102A or 261, and 242 or 235 or 241, and 178 or 179.

3 units, Aut (Kahn, J)

EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes

Mathematical methods and physical principles: statistics, Fourier analysis, statistical and quantum mechanics. Circuit theory: thermal noise, quantum noise, fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Macroscopic and mesoscopic conductors. Macroscopic and mesoscopic p-n junctions. 1/f noise and random telegraphic noise. Negative conductance oscillators (lasers) and nonlinear susceptance oscillators (optical parametric amplifier). Optical and quantum communication systems. Weak force detection systems. Prerequisites: elementary device, circuit, and electromagnetic waves to the level of 101A,B and 242.

3 units, Aut (Yamamoto, Y)

EE 249. Introduction to the Space Environment

The environment through which space probes and vehicles travel and orbit, and which moderates solar gases and radiation. Experimentation in this environment, tools used; regions into which it is divided including ionosphere, magnetosphere, heliosphere, and interplanetary space. The role of the Sun, the effects of changes in solar activity, charged particle motion which in combination with the Earth's magnetic field leads to auroras and the Van Allen belts. Prerequisites: electromagnetics at the level of 242 and senior or graduate standing.

3 units, alternate years, not given this year

EE 252. Antennas for Telecommunications and Remote Sensing

Fundamental properties. Dipoles, loops, reflectors, Yagis, helices, slots, horns, micro-strips. Antennas as transitions between guided and free radiation, ultrasound analogue. Famous antennas. Pattern measurements. Friis and radar equations. Feeds, matching, baluns. Broadbanding. Arrays, aperture synthesis, interferometry, very-long-baseline interferometry. Thermal radiation, antenna temperature, microwave passive remote sensing. Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 256. Numerical Electromagnetics

Principles and applications of numerical techniques for solving practical electromagnetics problems. Time domain solutions of Maxwell's equations. Finite difference time domain (FDTD) methods. Numerical stability, dispersion, and dissipation. Absorbing boundary conditions. Perfectly matched layer methods. Explicit and implicit methods. FDTD modeling of propagation and scattering in dispersive and anisotropic media. Near-to-far-zone transformations. Computational problems require programming and use of MATLAB and other tools. Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent.

3 units, Spr (Inan, U)

EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications

The Fourier transform as a tool for solving physical problems. Fourier series, the Fourier transform of continuous and discrete signals and its properties. The Dirac delta, distributions, and generalized transforms. Convolutions and correlations and applications; probability distributions, sampling theory, filters, and analysis of linear systems. The discrete Fourier transform and the FFT algorithm. Multidimensional Fourier transform and use in imaging. Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis is on relating the theoretical principles to solving practical engineering and science problems. Prerequisites: Fourier series at the level of 102A, and linear algebra.

3 units, Aut (Osgood, B), Win (Staff, 1), Sum (Staff)

EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging

Time and frequency representations, two-dimensional auto- and cross-correlation, Fourier spectra, diffraction and antennas, coordinate systems and the Hankel and Abel transforms, line integrals, impulses and sampling, restoration in the presence of noise, reconstruction and tomography, imaging radar. Tomographic reconstruction using projection-slice and layergarm methods. Students create software to form images using these techniques with actual data. Final project consists of design and simulation of an advanced imaging system. Prerequisite: 261. Recommended: 278, 279.

3 units, alternate years, not given this year

EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems

Applied linear algebra and linear dynamical systems with application to circuits, signal processing, communications, and control systems. Topics: least-squares approximations of over-determined equations and least-norm solutions of underdetermined equations. Symmetric matrices, matrix norm, and singular value decomposition. Eigenvalues, left and right eigenvectors, with dynamical interpretation. Matrix exponential, stability, and asymptotic behavior. Multi-input/multi-output systems, impulse and step matrices; convolution and transfer matrix descriptions. Control, reachability, and state transfer; observability and least-squares state estimation. Prerequisites: linear algebra and matrices as in MATH 103; differential equations and Laplace transforms as in EE 102A.

3 units, Aut (Boyd, S), Spr (Lall, S)

EE 264. Digital Signal Processing

Two sided Z-transform. Linear time invariant discrete time systems. Sampling theory; A/D and D/A conversion. Analog and digital filter design. Quantization of signals and filter conefficients. Signal scaling. DFS, DFT, and sampling in the frequency domain. Interpolation and decimation. Oversampling techniques for ADC and DAC. Digital signal processing for wireless communications. Prerequisite: 102B. Recommended: 261, 278.

3 units, Aut (Schafer, R), Sum (Staff)

EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory

Applying 102A,B to real-world signal processing applications. Lab exercises use a programmable DSP to implement signal processing tasks. Topics: A/D conversion and quantization, sampling theorem, Z-transform, discrete-time Fourier transform, IIR filters, FIR filters, filter design and implementation, spectral analysis, rate conversion, wireless data communication, OFDM receiver design. Prerequisites: 102A,B. Recommended: 261.

3-4 units, Win (Meng, T)

EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics

Geometrical optics: ray matrices, Gaussian beams, optical instruments, and radiometry. Wave nature of light: Maxwell's equations, propagation through media with varying index of refraction (e.g., fibers). Interferometry: basic principles, practical systems, and applications.

3 units, Aut (Hesselink, L)

EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems

Large-scale MOS design. Topics: MOS transistors, static and dynamic MOS gates, MOS circuit fabrication, design rules, resistance and capacitance extraction, power and delay estimation, scaling, MOS combinational and sequential logic design, registers and clocking schemes, memory, data-path, and control-unit design. Elements of computer-aided circuit analysis, synthesis, and layout techniques. Prerequisites: 101A and 108B; familiarity with transistors, logic design, Verilog, and digital system organization.

3 units, Aut (Mitra, S)

EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering

Electrical issues in the design of high-performance digital systems, including signaling, timing, synchronization, noise, and power distribution. High-speed signaling methods; noise in digital systems, its effect on signaling, and methods for noise reduction; timing conventions; timing noise (skew and jitter), its effect on systems, and methods for mitigating timing noise; synchronization issues and synchronizer design; clock and power distribution problems and techniques; impact of electrical issues on system architecture and design. Prerequisites: 102B and 108A, or equivalents. Recommended: 214.

3 units, Win (Staff)

EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications

Frequency reuse, cellular concepts, cochannel interference, handoff. Radio propagation in and around buildings: Friis equation, multipath, narrow-band and wide-band channels, small scale and large-scale statistics, space and time signal variation. Diversity. Receiver sensitivity, sources of noise, range. Performance statistics: coverage, margin, digital modulation, adjacent channel interference, and digital error rates. Wide band channels: maximum transmission rates. Multi-server queuing and traffic: Erlang formulas. Multiple access, FDMA, TDMA, CDMA; duplexing, FDD and TDD; multipath mitigation, OFDM, equalization, spread spectrum. Prerequisites: 242 and 278 or equivalent. Corequisite: 279 or equivalent.

3 units, Spr (Cox, D)

EE 278. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing

Random variables, vectors, and processes; convergence and limit theorems; IID, independent increment, Markov, and Gaussian random processes; stationary random processes; autocorrelation and power spectral density; mean square error estimation, detection, and linear estimation. May be repeated for credit one time. Prerequisites: 178 or STATS 116, and linear systems and Fourier transforms at the level of 102A,B or 261.

3 units, Aut (Gray, R), Spr (El Gamal, A), Sum (Staff)

EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems

Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digital modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion, multiplexing, noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise ratio analysis, probability of error in digital systems, spread spectrum. Prerequisites: 179 or 261, and 178 or 278.

3 units, Win (Cox, D)

EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture

Advanced system-level architecture techniques for devices such as personal computers, servers, and embedded or portable systems. Topics such as cache hierarchies, memory systems, storage and IO systems, virtualization, clusters, fault-tolerance, and low-power design. Interactions between hardware and software layers in such systems. Performance analysis and optimization techniques for small- and large-scale systems. Principles such as locality, coarse-grain parallelism, overlapping communication and computation, performance/power trade-offs, and reliability. Prerequisite: 108B. Recommended: CS 140.

3 units, Aut (Kozyrakis, C)

EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks

Structure and components of computer networks; functions and services; packet switching; layered architectures; OSI reference model; physical layer; data link layer; error control; window flow control; media access control protocols used in local area networks (Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI) and satellite networks; network layer (datagram service, virtual circuit service, routing, congestion control, Internet Protocol); transport layer (UDP, TCP); application layer.

3 units, Aut (Tobagi, F)

EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers

For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering.

1 unit, Aut , Win , Spr , Sum (Wong, S)

EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers

For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering.

1 unit, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Wong, S)

EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers

For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering.

1 unit, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Wong, S)

EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains

Finite-state and countable-state Markov chains. Controlled Markov chains and dynamic programming algorithms. Application to modeling and analysis of engineering systems. Prerequisites: 263, 278.

3 units, not given this year

EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes

For seniors and graduate students. Thermodynamics, heat engines, thermoelectics, biomass. Recommended: MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45

3-4 units, Aut (da Rosa, A)

EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes

For seniors and graduate students. Fuel cells. Production of hydrogen: electrolytic, chemical, thermolytic, photolytic. Hydrogen storage: hydrides. Photoelectric converters; photo-thermovoltaic converters. Wind turbines. Recommended: EE 293A; MATH 41; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45

3-4 units, Win (da Rosa, A)

EE 300. Master's Thesis and Thesis Research

Independent work under the direction of a department faculty. Written thesis required for final letter grade. The continuing grade 'N' is given in quarters prior to thesis submission. See 390 if a letter grade is not appropriate.

1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)

EE 302. Topics in Biomedical Electronics

Biomedical electronics and instruments based on electrical engineering for diagnostics and therapeutic treatments of biological systems, focusing on the theory and design principles in modern biomedical electronics using electromagnetic properties. Topics include circuit design for implanted medical devices, physics and signal processing for medical imaging systems, techniques for neural measurements and neuro-decoding, and electronics for drug delivery. Prerequisites: EE 214, 264,and 265.

3 units, Spr (Meng, T; Shenoy, K)

EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology

Memory devices: SRAM, DRAM, NVRAM (non-volatile memory). Functionality and performance of ULSI systems. Semiconductor memories, device design considerations, device scaling, device fabrication, addressing, and readout circuits. Cell structures (1T-1C, 6T, 4T, 1T-1R, 0T-1R, floating gate FLASH, SONOS, NROM), and memory organization (open bit-line, folded bit-line, NAND, NOR, cross-point). New memory concepts such as nanocrystal memory, single-electron memory, magnetic tunnel junction memory (MRAM), ferroelectric memory (FRAM), phase change memory (PRAM), T-RAM, polymer memory, metal oxide memory, nanoconductive bridge memory). Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.

3 units, alternate years, not given this year

EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar

State-of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, advanced materials, and nanoscience for device applications. Prerequisites: 216, 316.

1 unit, Win (Nishi, Y; Wong, P; Saraswat, K)

EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes

Practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of the technology of modern MOS devices. Modern device and circuit fabrication and likely future changes. Advanced techniques and models of device and back-end (interconnect and contact) processing. Use of TSUPREM4 and MEDICI for process and device modeling. MOS process integration. Prerequisites: 212, 216.

3 units, Spr (Saraswat, K)

EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators

Solid-state sensors and actuators, focusing on the use of integrated circuit fabrication technology for their realization. Categories of sensors and actuators include biological, chemical, mechanical, optical, and thermal. Mechanisms of transduction, fabrication techniques, and relative merits of different technologies. Micromachining techniques for monolithic integration of active circuits with sensors or actuators. Directions for future research. Prerequisite: 212 or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Giovangrandi, L)

EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits

Analysis and design of digital MOS integrated circuits. Development of different models for MOS transistors and how to use them to analyze circuit performance. Use of computer-aided circuit analysis. Logic styles include static, dynamic and pass logic, pulse-mode gates, and current-mode logic. Topics include sizing for min delay, noise and noise margins, power dissipation. The class uses memory design (SRAM) as a motivating example. DRAM and EEPROM design issues. Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended: 271.

3 units, Win (Horowitz, M)

EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design

Design of RF integrated circuits for communications systems, primarily in CMOS. Topics: the design of matching networks and low-noise amplifiers at RF, passive and active filters, mixers, modulators, and demodulators; review of classical control concepts necessary for oscillator design including PLLs and PLL-based frequency synthesizers. Design of low phase noise oscillators. Design of high-efficiency (e.g., class E, F) RF power amplifiers, coupling networks. Behavior and modeling of passive and active components at RF. Narrowband and broadband amplifiers; noise and distortion measures and mitigation methods. Overview of transceiver architectures. Prerequisite: 214.

3 units, Spr (Lee, T)

EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits

Design and analysis of integrated circuits for active filters, precision gain stages, and sensor interfaces in CMOS VLSI technology. Operational transconductance amplifiers; sampled-data and continuous-time analog filters. Analysis of noise and amplifier imperfections; compensation techniques such as correlated double sampling. Sensor interfaces for micro-electromechanical and biomedical applications. Layout techniques for analog integrated circuits.

3 units, Spr (Murmann, B)

EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices

In modern VLSI technologies, device electrical characteristics are sensitive to structural details and therefore to fabrication techniques. How are advanced VLSI devices designed and what future changes are likely? What are the implications for device electrical performance caused by fabrication techniques? Physical models for nanometer scale structures, control of electrical characteristics (threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic transport) in small structures, and alternative device structures for VLSI. Prerequisites: 212 and 216, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Wong, P)

EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits

The fundamentals of generating submicron patterns in integrated circuit manufacturing. Technologies include the formation of submicron images of ultraviolet light, the resulting exposure of polymeric resists, the subsequent development of resist patterns and their transfer into functional circuit material patterns through plasma etching and other techniques. Use of phase-shifting masks and other wavefront-engineering approaches. Hands-on computer simulations. Prerequisites: 141 or equivalent, 212 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology

Recent advances in materials science, device physics and structures, and processing technology, to extend VLS1 device scaling towards atomistic and quantum-mechanical physics boundaries. Topics include: mobility-enhancement techniques; nanomaterial structures including tube, wire, beam, and crystal; conducting polymer; 3D FET; gate-wraparound FET; nonvolatile memory phenomena and devices; self-assembly; flash annealing; plasma doping; and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.

3 units, Win (Nishi, Y; Sze, S)

EE 320. Nanoelectronics

Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of nanoelectric devices. Topics identified by the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research devices section; see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based devices such as carbon nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor nanowires, and molecular devices; and non-FET based devices such as single electron transistors (SET) and resonant tunneling diodes (RTD). Logic and memory devices. Prerequisites: undergraduate device physics, EE 222, 216. Recommended: EE 223, 228, or 316.

3 units, Spr (Wong, P)

EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics

Physics of charge and energy transfer in molecular systems and connection with traditional mesoscopic transport theories. Analysis of molecular organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells and transistors. Technology and applications of molecular semiconductors. Prerequisite: 228 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials

Modern semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are based on unique energy band, carrier transport, and optical properties of semiconductor materials. How to choose these properties for operation of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is on quantum mechanical foundations of the properties of solids, energy bandgap engineering, semiclassical transport theory, semiconductor statistics, carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport effects, high field ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation, quantum mechanical transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and non-radiative recombination. Prerequisites: 216, 228.

3 units, Spr (Harris, J)

EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices

Principles governing the operation of modern semiconductor devices. Assumptions and approximations commonly made in analyzing devices. Emphasis is on the application of semiconductor physics to the development of advanced semiconductor devices such as heterojunctions, HJ-bipolar transistors, HJ-FETs, nanostructures, tunneling, single electron transistor and photonic devices. Use of ATLAS, a 2-D Poisson solver, for simulation of ultra-small devices. Examples related to state-of-the-art devices and current device research. Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.

3 units, not given this year

EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces

Physical concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques probing the electronic structure of surfaces and interfaces. Microscopic and atomic models of microstructures; applications such as within semiconductor device technology and catalysis. Physical processes of low energy electron diffraction, Auger electron spectroscopy, UV and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, electron/photon stimulated ion desorption, inelastic tunneling spectroscopy, ion scattering, surface EXAFS, and energy loss spectroscopy; and experimental aspects of these surface science techniques. Prerequisites: PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of instructor.

3 units, Aut (Pianetta, P)

EE 335. Introduction to Information Storage Systems

State-of-the-art data storage technologies, including magnetic disk drive storage, optical data storage (CD-ROM, DVD, magneto-optic recording), solid state memory (flash memory, ferro-electric memory), and emerging technologies (magnetic random access memory, probe-based storage). Magnetic disk recording and comparisons among data storage technologies. Related nanotechnologies. Final presentation. Prerequisites: electromagnetism, optics, transistors, binary algebra, probability, and Fourier transform.

3 units, Win (Wang, S)

EE 336. Nanophotonics

(Same as MATSCI 346.) Recent developments in micro- and nanophotonic materials and devices. Basic concepts of photonic crystals. Integrated photonic circuits. Photonic crystal fibers. Superprism effects. Optical properties of metallic nanostructures. Sub-wavelength phenomena and plasmonic excitations. Meta-materials. Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.

3 units, Win (Fan, S; Brongersma, M)

EE 340. Advanced Topics in Optics and Quantum Optics

Optical microcavities and their device applications. Types of optical microcavities (microdisks, microspheres, and photonic crystal cavities), and their electromagnetic properties, design, and fabrication techniques. Cavity quantum electrodynamics: strong and weak-coupling regime, Purcell factor, spontaneous emission control. Applications of optical microcavities, including low-threshold lasers, resonant cavity light-emitting diodes, and single-photon sources. Prerequisites: advanced undergraduate or basic graduate-level knowledge of electromagnetics, quantum mechanics, and physics of semiconductors.

3 units, Spr (Vuckovic, J)

EE 343. Advanced Optoelectronic Devices

Semiconductor quantum well structures; superlattices and coupled quantum wells; optical properties of quantum wells; valence band structure; effects of strain; quantum well lasers; intersubband detectors; excitons in quantum wells; absorption saturation; electroabsorption; quantum well modulators and switches. Prerequisites: 222 or equivalent quantum mechanics, 243. Recommended: 223.

3 units, not given this year

EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory

Lecture/lab emphasizing lab. Techniques in the 1MHz-1GHz range useful in designing and measuring oscillators, amplifiers, and mixers. High frequency measurement techniques including s-parameter measurements, amplifier noise figure, and oscillator phase noise. Guest speakers from Lucent and Hewlett-Packard. Enrollment limited to 25. Prerequisites: transmission lines, Smith charts. Recommended: 314.

3 units, Aut (Scherer, D; Swain, H; Cox, D)

EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory

Experimental techniques in optical fiber communications. Experimental investigation of key optical communications components including fibers, lasers, modulators, photodiodes, optical amplifiers, and WDM multiplexers and demultiplexers. Key optical communications systems techniques: eye diagrams and BER measurements. Prerequisites: undergraduate physics and optics.

3 units, Spr (Kazovsky, L)

EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics

Wave propagation in anisotropic, nonlinear, and time-varying media. Microscopic and macroscopic description of electric dipole susceptibilities. Free and forced waves-phasematching; slowly varying envelope approximation-dispersion, diffraction, space-time analogy; harmonic generation; frequency conversion; parametric amplification and oscillation; electro-optic light modulation; nonlinear processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites: 141, 242.

3 units, Spr (Harris, S)

EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science

Design and understanding of modern optical systems. Topics: geometrical optics; aberration theory; systems layout; applications such as microscopes, telescopes, optical processors. Computer ray tracing program as a design tool. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications

Optical amplifiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor amplifiers. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. System applications: preamplified receiver performance, amplifier chains. Raman amplifiers, lumped vs. distributed amplification. Group-velocity dispersion management: dispersion-compensating fibers, filters, gratings. Interaction of dispersion and nonlinearity, dispersion maps. Multichannel systems. Wavelength-division multiplexing components: filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk. Time-, subcarrier-, code- and polarization-division multiplexing. Solitons, loss- and dispersion-managed solitons. Comparison of modulation techniques: duobinary, pulse-amplitude modulation, differential phase-shift keying, phase-shift keying, quadrature-amplitude modulation. Comparison of detection techniques: noncoherent, differentially coherent, coherent. Spectral efficiency limits. Error-control coding. Prerequisite: 247.

3 units, not given this year

EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics

Coupled wave analysis of periodic structures, gratings structures for optical communcations, wave-matter interactions with periodic media and photonic crystals, applications of periodic structures. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Hesselink, L)

EE 350. STARLab Seminar

Research topics from space physics, planetary exploration, ionospheric and magnetospheric physics, radar and remote sensing of the environment, applied electromagnetics, waves in optical fibers, and information systems with space applications. Applied research areas include wireless personal communications, high bandwidth wired and wireless transmission, optical communication systems, sensor networks, and related underlying and advancing technologies.

1 unit, Win (Inan, U)

EE 353. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer Scientists

For graduate students with little or no business experience. Leading computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and their best practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions these companies face. Corporate strategy, new product development, marketing, sales, distribution, customer service, financial accounting, outsourcing, and human behavior in business organizations. Case studies. Prerequisite: graduate standing.

3 units, Spr (Gibbons, F; Siegel, M)

EE 354. Introduction to Radio Wave Scattering

Integral and differential equations of radio wave scattering; exact, approximate, and numerical solutions of single particle scattering for spheres, edges, points, and cylinders. Scattering from rough surfaces with large and small roughness scales, as time permits. Multiple scattering; formulation and solution techniques for equation of transfer in discrete media and scattering by continuous media in weak and strong regimes. Applications to radar, radar astronomy, remote sensing, and biological media. Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory through standard graduate engineering topics; partial differential equations, boundary value problems in rectangular and spherical coordinates; and consent of instructor.

3 units, not given this year

EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications

(Same as GEOPHYS 265.) Radar remote sensing, radar image characteristics, viewing geometry, range coding, synthetic aperture processing, correlation, range migration, range/Doppler algorithms, wave domain algorithms, polar algorithm, polarimetric processing, interferometric measurements. Applications: polarimetry and target discrimination, topographic mapping surface displacements, velocities of ice fields.

3 units, Win (Zebker, H)

EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and Applications

Plasmas in nature and industry. Single particle motions. Plasma kinetic theory. Boltzmann equation and its moments. Cold and warm plasma models. Plasma as a fluid. Magnetohydrodynamics. Plasma conductivity and diffusion. Langmuir oscillations. Debye shielding. Plasma sheath. Waves in cold, magnetized, warm, and hot plasmas. Electron and ion waves. MHD waves. Landau damping. Nonlinear effects. Applications in industry and space science. Prerequisite: 242 or PHYSICS 122.

3 units, not given this year

EE 359. Wireless Communication

Design, performance analysis, and performance limits of wireless systems. Topics include: current wireless systems, path loss and shadowing, statistical multipath channel models, capacity of wireless channels, digital modulation and its performance in fading and intersymbol interference, adaptive modulation, diversity, multiple antenna systems (MIMO), equalization, multicarrier modulation, and spread spectrum and RAKE receivers. Possible additional topics: multiuser system design issues such as multiple access, frequency reuse in cellular systems, and ad hoc wireless network design. Prerequisite: 279.

3-4 units, Win (Goldsmith, A)

EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks

Design, analysis, and fundamental limits. Possible topics include multiuser detection and interference cancellation, multiple access, cellular system design and optimization, Shannon capacity and achievable rate regions of wireless multiuser channels and networks, ad hoc wireless network design, sensor and energy-constrained networks, and cross-layer design. Prerequisite: 359.

3 units, not given this year

EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems

Continuation of 263. Optimal control and dynamic programming; linear quadratic regulator. Lyapunov theory and methods. Linear estimation and the Kalman filter. Perron-Frobenius theory. Examples and applications from digital filters, circuits, signal processing, and control systems. Prerequisites: 263 or equivalent; basic probability.

3 units, Win (Boyd, S)

EE 364A. Convex Optimization I

Convex sets, functions, and optimization problems. The basics of convex analysis and theory of convex programming: optimality conditions, duality theory, theorems of alternative, and applications. Least-squares, linear and quadratic programs, semidefinite programming, and geometric programming. Numerical algorithms for smooth and equality constrained problems; interior-point methods for inequality constrained problems. Applications to signal processing, communications, control, analog and digital circuit design, computational geometry, statistics, machine learning, and mechanical engineering. Prerequisite: linear algebra such as 263.

3 units, Spr (Boyd, S)

EE 364B. Convex Optimization II

Continuation of 364. Subgradient, cutting-plane, and ellipsoid methods. Decentralized convex optimization via primal and dual decomposition. Alternating projections. Exploiting problem structure in implementation. Convex relaxations of hard problems, and global optimization via branch and bound. Robust optimization. Applications in areas such as control, circuit design, signal processing, and communications. Substantial project. Prerequisite: 364A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics

Applications of Fourier theory to the analysis and synthesis of optical imaging and optical data processing systems. Propagation and diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer approximations, Fourier transforming properties of lenses, image formation with coherent and incoherent light, transform functions of imaging systems, optical data processing, and holography. Prerequisite: familiarity with Fourier analysis. Recommended: 261.

3 units, not given this year

EE 368. Digital Image Processing

Image sampling and quantization, color, point operations, segmentation, linear image filtering and correlation, image transforms, eigenimages, multidimensional signals and systems, multiresolution image processing, wavelets, morphological image processing, noise reduction and restoration, simple feature extraction and recognition tasks, image registration. Students write and investigate image processing algorithms in Matlab. Competitive term project. Prerequisites: 261, 278.

3 units, not given this year

EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I

Imaging internal structures within the body using high-energy radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities covered: x-ray, computed tomography, and nuclear medicine. Analysis of existing and proposed systems in terms of resolution, frequency response, detection sensitivity, noise, and potential for improved diagnosis. Prerequisite: 261.

3 units, Win (Nishimura, D)

EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II

Imaging internal structures within the body using non-ionizing radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities include ultrasound and magnetic resonance. Analysis of ultrasonic systems including diffraction and noise. Analysis of magnetic resonance systems including physics, Fourier properties of image formation, and noise. Prerequisite: 261.

3 units, Spr (Nishimura, D)

EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction

Reconstruction problems from medical imaging, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET). Problems include reconstruction from non-uniform frequency domain data, automatic deblurring, phase unwrapping, reconstruction from incomplete data, and reconstruction from projections. Prerequisite: 369B.

3 units, not given this year

EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design

Issues in high performance digital CMOS VLSI design from a system perspective. Topics: wire modeling, logic families, latch design and clocking issues, clock distribution, RAMs, ALUs, I/O and I/O noise issues. Final project involves the design of a subsystem for a high-speed processor. Extensive use of SPICE. Prerequisites: 271 and 313, or consent of instructor.

3 units, Spr (Stark, D; Ho, R)

EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing

Self-optimizing systems whose performance is improved through contact with their environments. Feedback models for least mean-square adaptation processes. Steepest descent, Newton's method, and Southwell relaxation methods. Random search. LMS algorithm. Efficiency measures for adaptive processes. Adaptive digital filters, noise canceling and signal enhancement, adaptive antennas, adaptive control systems. Original theoretical and experimental research projects in electrical engineering and biomedical engineering, teamwork. Prerequisites: 263, 264. Recommended: 278.

3 units, Win (Widrow, B)

EE 373B. Adaptive Neural Networks

Adaptive threshold elements, feedfoward layered networks, back-propagation algorithm. Adaptive decision making. Adaptive gaming. Principal components analysis. Nonlinear adaptive filtering. Volterra adaptive filtering. Recurrent neural networks. Experimental and theoretical applications of neural networks to pattern recognition, speech recognition, and self-learning adaptive control systems. Reinforcement learning. Cognitive memory, human and machine. Original theoretical and experimental research projects in electrical engineering and biomedical engineering. Continuation of projects begun in 373A. Prerequisite: 373A.

3 units, Spr (Widrow, B)

EE 375. Quantization Noise

The effects of roundoff noise in digital computation, signal processing, control, and communication systems. Definition of the quantizer. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion. Probability density functions, characteristic functions, and moments. Statistical analysis of quantization noise. General statistical relations between quantization noise, the quantizer input, and the quantizer output. Sampling and quantization of Gaussian and other time series. Linearization with additive dither signals. Quantization noise in feedback control systems, signal processing systems, FFT algorithm, linear and nonlinear systems, chaotic systems. Quantizing noise theorems for conditions of whiteness, uncorrelatedness, zero mean, and variance of (q^2)/12. Coefficient quantization in digital filters. Recommended: 264, 278.

3 units, Aut (Widrow, B)

EE 376A. Information Theory

Extreme points of communication theory: data compression to the entropy limit, and communication at the channel capacity limit. Shannon entropy. Rate distortion theory. Huffman coding. Kolmogorov complexity. Unified treatment based on the asymptotic equipartition theorem. Prerequisite: 178 or 278 or STATS 116, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Cover, T)

EE 376B. Information Theory

Rate distortion theory and Kolmogorov complexity. Information theory and statistics. Method of types. Stein's lemma. AEP. Information capacity of networks. Slepian-Wolf theorem. Optimal investment and information theory. Universal portfolios and universal data compression. Maximum entropy and Burg's theorem. Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, Spr (Cover, T)

EE 378. Statistical Signal Processing

Random signals in electrical engineering. Discrete-time random processes: stationarity and ergodicity, covariance sequences, power spectral density, parametric models for stationary processes. Fundamentals of linear estimation: minimum mean squared error estimation, optimum linear estimation, orthogonality principle, the Wold decomposition. Causal linear estimation of stationary processes: the causal Wiener filter, Kalman filtering. Parameter estimation: criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher information, Cramer-Rao inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality, maximum likelihood estimation, method of moments, consistency, efficiency. ARMA parameter estimation: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-Durbin algorithm, least squares estimation, moving average parameter estimation, modified Yule-Walker method for model order selection. Spectrum estimation: sample covariances, covariance estimation, Bartlett formula, periodogram, periodogram averaging, windowed periodograms. Prerequisite: 278.

3 units, Spr (Staff, 1)

EE 379A. Digital Communication I

Maximum-likelihood data detection, modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, bandpass systems and analysis, intersymbol interference and equalization methods, diversity, phase-locking, and synchronization. Prerequisites: 102B, 278.

3 units, Win (Kahn, J)

EE 379C. Advanced Digital Communication

Multi-dimensional modulation and basis functions, transmit optimization for channels with intersymbol interference, discrete multitone (DMT), orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), vector modulation, generalized decision-feedback equalization (GDFE). Prerequisite: 379A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 380. Seminar on Computer Systems

Current research in the design, implementation, analysis, and use of computer systems from integrated circuits to operating systems and programming languages.

1 unit, Aut (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Win (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Spr (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Sum (Allison, D)

EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture

Topics include advanced instruction-set design and pipelining, wide instruction fetch, branch prediction, out-of-order and speculative execution, memory disambiguation, vector processors, simultaneous multithreading, multi-core systems, memory hierarchies, and low-level compiler optimizations for processor efficiency. Trade-offs among performance, power, and complexity, and techniques for addressing them. Design or research project in processor architecture. Prerequisites: 108B, 282.

3 units, Spr (Kozyrakis, C)

EE 382C. Interconnection Networks

The architecture and design of interconnection networks used to communicate from processor to memory, from processor to processor, and in switches and routers. Topics: network topology, routing methods, flow control, router microarchitecture, and performance analysis. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.

3 units, not given this year

EE 382D. Advanced Computer Arithmetic

Number systems, floating point representation, state of the art in arithmetic algorithms, problems in the design of high speed arithmetic units. Prerequisite: 282.

3 units, Win (Flynn, M)

EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards

Local area networks: MAC addressing; IEEE 802.1 bridging protocols (transparent bridging, virtual LANs). Internet routing protocols: Internet protocol (IPv4, IPv6, ICMP); interior gateways (RIP, OSPF) and exterior gateways (BGP, policy routing); IP multicast (IGMP, DVMRP, CBT, MOSPF, PIM); multiprotocol label switching (MPLS). Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet

Applications and requirements. Traffic generation and characterization: voice encoding (G.711, G.729, G.723); image and video compression (JPEG, H.261, MPEG-2, H.263, H.264), TCP data traffic. Quality impairments and measures. Networking technologies: LAN technologies; home broadband services (ADSL, cable modems, PONs); and wireless LANs (802.11). Network protocols for multimedia applications: resource reservation (ST2+, RSVP); differentiated services (DiffServ); and real-time transport protocol (RTP, RTCP). Audio-video-data conferencing standards: Internet architecture (SDP, SAP, SIP); ITU recommendations (H.320, H.323 and T.120); and real-time streaming protocol (RTSP). Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A. Recommended: 384A.

3 units, Spr (Tobagi, F)

EE 384C. Wireless Local Area Networks

Characteristics of wireless communication: multipath, noise, and interference. Communications techniques: spread-spectrum, CDMA, and OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical layer specifications: FHSS, DSSS, IEEE 802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g (OFDM). IEEE 802.11 media access control protocols: carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), point coordination function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated services. IEEE 802.11 network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure modes, access point functionality. Management functions: synchronization, power management and association. Current research papers in the open literature. Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 384M. Network Algorithms

Theory and practice of designing and analyzing algorithms arising in networks. Topics include: designing algorithms for load balancing, switching, congestion control, network measurement, the web infrastructure, and wireless networks; and analyzing the performance of algorithms via stochastic network theory. Algorithm design using randomization, probabilistic sampling, and other approximation methods. Analysis methods include the use of large deviation theory, fluid models, and stochastic comparison. Research project. Prerequisite: 278 or CS 365.

3 units, Spr (Prabhakar, B)

EE 384S. Network Architectures and Performance Engineering

Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance network engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic modeling, queueing networks and congestion management, dynamic programming and task/processor scheduling, network dimensioning and optimization, and simulation methods. Applications for design of high-performance architectures for wireline/wireless networks and the Internet, including: traffic modeling, admission and congestion control, quality of service support, power control in wireless networks, packet scheduling in switches, video streaming over wireless links, and virus/worm propagation dynamics and countermeasures. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisites: basic networking technologies and probability.

3 units, Spr (Bambos, N)

EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures I

First of two-course sequence. Theory and practice of designing packet switches and routers. Evolution of switches and routers. Output scheduling: fairness, delay guarantees, algorithms. Unicast switching: blocking phenomena and their alleviation, connection between switch scheduling and bipartite graph matching. Multicast switching. Theoretical complements: simple queueing models, Bernoulli and Poisson processes, graph matching algorithms, urn problems, stability analysis using Lyapunov functions, fluid models. Prerequisites: 284 or CS 244A, 178 or 278 or STAT 116.

3 units, not given this year

EE 384Y. Packet Switch Architectures II

Second of two-course sequence. Theory and practice of designing packet switches and routers. Address lookup: exact matches, longest prefix matches, performance metrics, hardware and software solutions. Packet classifiers: for firewalls, QoS, and policy-based routing; graphical description and examples of 2-D classification, examples of classifiers, theoretical and practical considerations.

3 units, not given this year

EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar

Student/faculty discussions of research problems in the design of reliable digital systems. Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for testability, production testing, and system reliability. Emphasis is on student presentations and Ph.D. thesis research. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.

1-4 units, Aut (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Win (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Spr (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Sum (McCluskey, E)

EE 386. Robust System Design

Causes of system malfunctions; techniques for building robust systems that avoid or are resilient to such malfunctions through built-in error detection and correction, prediction, self-test, self-recovery, and self-repair; case studies and new research problems. Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.

3 units, Spr (Mitra, S)

EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes

Theory and implementation of algebraic codes for detection and correction of random and burst errors. Introduction to finite fields. Linear block codes, cyclic codes, Hamming codes, Fire codes, BCH codes, Reed-Solomon codes. Decoding algorithms for BCH and Reed-Solomon codes. Prerequisites: elementary probability, linear algebra.

3 units, Aut (Gill III, J)

EE 388. Modern Coding Theory

Tools for analysis and optimization of iterative coding systems. LDPC, turbo and, RA codes. Optimized ensembles, message passing algorithms, density evolution, and analytic techniques. Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, Spr (Montanari, A)

EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering

Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual or team activities may involve lab experimentation, design of devices or systems, or directed reading.

1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)

EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering

Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written report or written examination required. Letter grade given on the basis of the report; if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390.

1-15 units, Aut (Palanker, D), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)

EE 392B. Introduction to Imaging Sensors

Design and analysis: silicon photodetectors; CCD and CMOS passive and active sensor operation; noise and FPN analysis; spatial resolution and MTF; SNR and dynamic range; high dynamic range architectures; A/D conversion approaches. Analysis of the signal path in a digital camera starting from the optics, through the sensor, the A/D converter, to the different color processing steps. MATLAB camera simulator is used to explore various tradeoffs in camera design. Prerequisites: undergraduate level device, circuit, and system background equivalent to 102A, 101A,B; and familiarity with noise analysis.

3 units, not given this year

EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits

Similar to former 318. Solving logic design problems with CAD tools for VLSI circuits. Exact and heuristic algorithms for logic synthesis. Representation and optimization of combinational logic functions (encoding problems, binary decision diagrams) and of multiple-level networks (algebraic and Boolean methods, don't-care set computation, timing verification, and optimization);and modeling and optimization of sequential functions and networks (retiming), semicustom libraries, and library binding. Prerequisites: familiarity with logic design, algorithm development, and programming.

3 units, Win (Vishnu, M)

EE 392G. Terahertz Technologies and Applications

Principles of THz wave generation, detection, and applications. Sources and systems that provide access to the THz region of the spectrum include ultrafast time-domain systems, direct generation using terahertz lasers as well as nonlinear optical frequency conversion. Terahertz measurement techniques include detector technologies, terahertz waveguides, terahertz measurements using surface plasmons, near-field effects, and nonlinear optical methods of detection. Applications of terahertz radiation including spectroscopy, sensing, and imaging, holography, terahertz communications concepts and systems, photonic crystals, and metamaterials.

3 units, Aut (Vodopyanov, K)

EE 392H. Coding for Wireless Channels

Theoretical foundations of modern coding theory, with applications to wireless transmission systems. State-of-the-art coding theory using soft (maximum-likelihood) decoding. Topics include: fading channel models (independent fading, block fading, MIMO); information-theoretic performance limits; coding on signal spaces; optimization criteria for code design; factor-graphical models of codes including block, convolutional, turbo, LDPC, and concatenated codes; trellis-coded modulation and bit-interleaved modulation; iterative (turbo) receivers for coded signals: memoryless, intersymbol-interference, MIMO, and multiuser channels; and EXIT-chart analyses of performance. Prerequisites: EE 278, 279. Recommended: EE 376A.

3 units, Aut (Staff)

EE 392R. Charged Particle Optics

Electron optics of charged particle instruments including transmission electron microscope, scanning electron microscope and related tools, mass and energy spectrometers, electron beam lithography tools, focused ion beam systems, electron diffraction, proximal probe tools such as the scanning tunneling microscope. Topics include sources, first-order focusing of electrons and ions, third-order aberrations, space-charge effects and diffraction. Goal is to compute the optical parameters of axially-symmetric magnetic and electric lenses and to be familiar with the principles of operation of the above charged-particle systems and the factors limiting their performance. Prerequisites: undergraduate geometrical optics and vector calculus or 217.

3 units, not given this year

EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug

Seminars by industry professionals in digital IC manufacturing test and silicon debug. Topics include yield and binsplit modeling, defect types and detection, debug hardware, physical analysis, and design for test/debug circuits. Case studies of silicon failures. Prerequisite: basic digital IC design (271 or 371).

1 unit, Aut (Stinson, J)

EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching

Open to advanced EE graduate students who plan to make teaching their career. Students conduct a section of an established course taught in parallel by an experienced instructor. Enrollment limited.

1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S)

EE 398A. Image Communication I

First of two-course series. Principles and systems for digital image communication, emphasizing source coding for efficient storage and transmission of still and moving images. Fundamentals and still image communication techniques. Lossless coding principles. Arithmetic coding, run-length coding. Facsimile coding. Lossy compression principles, scalar quantization, vector quantization. Lossless and lossy predictive coding. Transform coding. Multiresolution coding, subband coding, and wavelets. EZW and SPIHT coding. Embedded image representations. Standards: ITU-T T.4, T.6, JBIG, JPEG, JPEG-2000. Students investigate image compression algorithms in Matlab. Prerequisites: 261, 278.

3 units, not given this year

EE 398B. Image Communication II

Second of two-course series. Digital video communication techniques. Interframe coding. Conditional replenishment. Motion-compensated prediction. Motion-compensated hybrid coding. Motion estimation. Rate distortion analysis and optimization of video coding schemes. Advanced motion compensation techiques. Scalable layered video representations. Error-resilient video coding. Applications: videotelephony, videoconferencing, digital TV broadcasting, Internet video streaming, wireless video. Standards: MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, ITU-T, H.261, H.263, H264. Students investigate video compression algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project. Prerequisite: 398A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research

Limited to candidates for the degree of Engineer or Ph.D.

1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)

EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management

Theme for 2007-08 is innovation systems and processes in Asia. Government funding, university/industry relations, and technology transfer in Asia, with the U.S. as point of comparison. How companies and entrepreneurs convert invention into profit. Guest speakers from industry and government.

1 unit, Aut (Dasher, R)

EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology Research

Theme for 2006-07 is advanced technologies for biomedical applications. Photonic and electronic systems and components for imaging, micro-Â­arrays, drug delivery, artificial organs, and robot-assisted surgery. Guest speakers from industry, government, and universities. May be repeated for credit. Recommended: basic electronics.

1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)

EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries

Patterns and challenges of entrepreneurship in Asia. Business and technology issues in start-up companies in Asian economies. Guest speakers from industry, government, and universities. May be repeated for credit.

1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)

EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory

Fabrication, simulation, and testing of a highly simplified 1.5 micron CMOS process developed for this course. Practical aspects of IC fabrication including silicon wafer cleaning, photolithography, etching, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapor deposition, physical sputtering, and wafer testing. Students perform simulations of the CMOS process using process simulator TSUPREM4 of the structures and electrical parameters that should result from the process flow in the lab. Taught in the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF) in the Center for Integrated Systems (CIS). Preference to students pursuing doctoral research program requiring SNF facilities. Enrollment limited to 20. Prerequisites: 212, 216, consent of instructor.

3-4 units, Win (Saraswat, K)

EE 414. RF Transceiver Design Laboratory

Students design, build, and test GHz transceivers using microstrip construction techniques and discrete components. The design, construction, and experimental characterization of representative transceiver building blocks: low noise amplifiers (LNAs), diode ring mixers, PLL-based frequency synthesizers, voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs), power amplifiers (PAs), and microstrip filters and patch antennas. The characteristics of passive microstrip components (including interconnect). Emphasis is on a quantitative reconciliation of theoretical predictions and extensive experimental measurements performed with spectrum and network analyzers, time-domain reflectometers (TDRs), noise figure meter and phase noise analyzers. Prerequisites: 314, 344.

3 units, Win (Lee, T)

EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering

Neuroscience and electrical engineering, focusing on principles and theory in modern neural prosthetic systems (brain-computer or brain-machine interfaces). Electrical properties of neurons, information encoding, neural measurement techiques and technology, processing electronics, information decoding and estimators, and statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: 214, 278.

3 units, not given this year

EE 453. Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation

Research on the radiation belts of Earth and other planets. Physical processes which lead to magnetic trapping of electrons and ions. Analytical tools for trapped radiation research. The nature of radiation belts, source and loss mechanisms, and the relation of radiation belts to other geophysical phenomena.

3 units, Win (Spasojevic, M)

EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS) based on the use of radio frequency pulses to manipulate magnetization. Analysis and design of major types of RF pulses in one and multiple dimensions, analysis and design of sequences of RF pulses for fast imaging, and use of RF pulses for the creation of image contrast in MRI. Prerequisite: 369B.

3 units, not given this year

EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory

Universal schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel coding and decoding, prediction, denoising, and filtering. Characterization of performance limitations in the stochastic settting: entropy rate, rate-distortion function, channel capacity, Bayes envelope for prediction, denoising, and filtering. Lempel-Ziv lossless compression, and Lempel-Ziv based schemes for lossy compression, channel coding, prediction, and filtering. Discrete universal denoising. Compression-based approach to denoising. The compound decision problem. Prerequisites: 278, 376A,B.

3 units, not given this year

EE 478. Topics in Multiple User Information Theory

Topics in multiple user source and channel coding; multiple access channel, correlated source coding, broadcast channel, interference channel, relay channel, and channels with feedback; asymptotic capacity of networks; source coding with side information, multiple descriptions, channels with state, MIMO channels. Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 479. Multiuser Digital Transmission Systems

Multiuser communications design, modulation, and reception. Capacity regions and fundamentally optimum designs for multiple access, broadcast, and interference channels. Iterative waterfilling, optimum spectrum balancing, band preference methods, vectoring, and multi-user generalized decision feedback equalization (GDFE) as used for vector broadcast and multiple access. Prerequisite: 379C.

3 units, Aut (Cioffi, J)

EE 492M. Space-Time Wireless Communications

For EE graduate students and wireless design engineers. Space-time wireless (smart antenna) communications and improvements in capacity, coverage, and quality of wireless networks. Multiple input multiple output (MIMO), and its use in WiFi and WIMAX systems and in next generation mobile systems such as 3GPPLTE. Prerequisites: 276, 278, 279. Recommended: 359.

3 units, not given this year



	

	© Stanford University - Office of the Registrar. Archive of the Stanford Bulletin 2008-09. Terms of Use | Copyright Complaints



