ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
COURSES
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES IN
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Primarily for undergraduates; graduate students may enroll with
consent of adviser.
EE 14N. Things about Stuff
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) Preference to freshmen. The stories
behind disruptive inventions such as the telegraph, telephone,
wireless, television, transistor, and chip are as important as the
inventions themselves, for they elucidate broadly applicable scientific
principles. Focus is on studying consumer devices; projects
include building batteries, energy conversion devices and semiconductors
from pocket change. Students may propose topics and
projects of interest to them. The trajectory of the course is determined
in large part by the students themselves. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Lee, T)
EE 15N. The Art and Science of Engineering Design
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) The goal of this seminar is to
introduce freshmen to the design process associated with an engineering
project. The seminar will consist of a series of lectures.
The first part of each lecture will focus on the different design
aspects of an engineering project, including formation of the design
team, developing a project statement, generating design ideas
and specifications, finalizing the design, and reporting the outcome.
Students will form teams to follow these procedures in designing
a term project of their choice over the quarter. The second
part of each lecture will consist of outside speakers, including
founders of some of the most exciting companies in Silicon Valley,
who will share their experiences about engineering design. On-site
visits to Silicon Valley companies to showcase their design processes
will also be part of the course. The seminar serves three purposes:
(1) it introduces students to the design process of turning an
idea into a final GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Goldsmith, A; Le, M)
EE 17N. Engineering the Micro and Nano Worlds: From
Chips to Genes
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) Preference to freshmen. Hands-on
micro- and nano-fabrication including the Stanford Nanofabrication
Facility (SNF) and the Stanford Nanocharacterization Laboratory
(SNL) and field trips to local companies and other research
centers to illustrate the many applications; these include semiconductor
integrated circuits ('chips'), DNA microarrays, microfluidic
bio-sensors and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Students
create, design, propose, and execute a project. How to read
critically a New York Times article on nanotechnology. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Pease, R)
EE 21N. What is Nanotechnology?
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) Nanotechnology an often used
word: scientists and engineers have some notion of what nanotechnology
is, societal perception may be entirely different. The classic
paper by Richard Feynman (There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom),
which laid down the challenge to the nanotechnologists. Two
classic books that offer a glimpse of what nanotechnology is: Engines
of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology by Eric
Drexler, and Prey by Michael Crichton. Drexler's thesis sparked
the imagination of what nano machinery might do, whereas Crichton's
popular novel channeled the public's attention to this subject
by portraying a disastrous scenario of a technology gone astray.
Course uses scientific knowledge to analyze the assumptions and
predictions of these classic works. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Wong, P)
EE 25Q. Electric Automobiles and Aircraft
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) (Same as AA 116N) Transportation
accounts for nearly one-third of American energy use and
greenhouse gas emissions and three-quarters of American oil consumption.
It has crucial impacts on climate change, air pollution,
resource depletion, and national security. Students wishing to address
these issues will need to reconsider how we move, finding
sustainable transportation solutions. This course will provide an
introduction to the issue, covering the past and present of transportation
and its impacts; examining alternative fuel proposals; and
digging deeper into the most promising option: battery electric
vehicles. Energy requirements of air, ground, and maritime transportation;
design of electric motors, power control systems, drive
trains, and batteries; and technologies for generating renewable
energy. Two fun opportunities for hands-on experiences with electric
cars. Prerequisites: Introduction to calculus and Physics AP or
elementary mechanics.
3 units, Aut (Cox, D; Enge, P)
EE 41. Physics of Electrical Engineering
How everything from electrostatics to quantum mechanics is used
in common high-technology products. Electrostatics are critical in
micro-mechanical systems used in many sensors and displays, and
basic EM waves are essential in all high-speed communication
systems. How to propagate energy in free space. Which aspects of
modern physics are needed to generate light for the operation of a
DVD player or TV. Introduction to semiconductors, solid-state
light bulbs, and laser pointers. Hands-on labs to connect physics to
everyday experience. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
5 units, Win (Solgaard, O)
EE 46. Engineering For Good: Save the World and Have Fun
Doing It
Projects that provide immediate and positive impact on the world.
Focus is on global health by learning from experts in this field.
Students work on real-world projects with help from members of
NGOs and social entrepreneurial companies as part of the hand-on
learning experience. Prerequisite: ENGR 40 or EE 122A or CS
106B or consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 47. Press Play: Interactive Device Design
Introduction to the human-centered and technical workings behind
interactive devices ranging from cellphones and video controllers
to smart cars and appliances. Students build a working MP3 player
prototype of their own design, using embedded microcontrollers,
digital audio decoders and component sensors, and other electronic
hardware. Topics include electronics prototyping, interface prototyping,
sensors and actuators, micro-controller development, physical
prototyping, and user testing. Prerequisite: CS106A and X or
consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 48. Hacking Stuff
Students build miniature autonomous cars that compete in a race
against the clock. How to design a complete system by bringing
together the various disciplines of electrical engineering such as
control theory, circuit design, microprocessor programming, and
semiconductor device physics. Students design, build, and program
each component of an autonomous vehicle and in doing so are
introduced to the broad discipline of electrical engineering through
lab work. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Peumans, P)
EE 49. Building Networked Systems
Preference to sophomores. The design of a complete networked
system by combining electrical engineering disciplines such as
coding theory, communication theory and networking. Based on
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 587
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
programmable radios, the design and construction of a networked
system capable of audio communication between any two nodes in
a network, essentially building a simple phone network. Preference
to sophomores. Application required. Prerequisites: CS106A,
CS106B.
3 units, Spr (Katti, S)
EE 60N. Man versus Nature: Coping with Disasters Using
Space Technology
(Stanford Introductory Seminar) (Same as GEOPHYS 60N) Preference
to freshman. Natural hazards, such as earthquakes, volcanoes,
floods, hurricanes, and fires, affect the lives of thousands of
people worldwide everyday. Over the past twenty years developments
in spaceborne imaging technology have made it possible to
monitor and respond to such disasters much more rapidly than in
the past, saving lives and money. Additionally, greater understanding
of the physical processes involved allows anticipation and
planning for mitigation of the consequences of the disasters. How
these new tools are applied to natural disasters, and how the remotely-
sensed data are manipulated and analyzed. The technical
material consists of a summary of basic geophysical properties of
the Earth, their physical characteristics that can be sensed remotely,
and the design of satellite systems to measure these phenomena
and predict/mitigate natural hazards. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Zebker, H)
EE 100. The Electrical Engineering Profession
Lectures/discussions on topics of importance to the electrical engineering
professional. Continuing education, professional societies,
intellectual property and patents, ethics, entrepreneurial engineering,
and engineering management.
1 unit, Aut (Staff)
EE 101A. Circuits I
First of two-course sequence. Introduction to circuit modeling and
analysis. Topics include creating the models of typical components
in electronic circuits and simplifying non-linear models for restricted
ranges of operation (small signal model); and using network
theory to solve linear and non-linear circuits under static and
dynamic operations. Prerequisite: Physics 43 GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Howe, R)
EE 101B. Circuits II
Second of two-course sequence. MOS large-signal and smallsignal
models. MOS amplifier design including DC bias, small
signal performance, multistage amplifiers, frequency response, and
feedback. Prerequisite: 101A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Hershenson, M)
EE 102A. Signal Processing and Linear Systems I
Concepts and mathematical tools in continuous-time signal processing
and linear systems analysis, illustrated with examples from
signal processing, communications, and control. Mathematical
representation of signals and systems. Linearity and timeinvariance.
System impulse and step response. Frequency domain
representations: Fourier series and Fourier transforms. Filtering
and signal distortion. Time/frequency sampling and interpolation.
Continuous-discrete time signal conversion and quantization.
Stability and causality in linear systems. Laplace transforms
and Bode plots. Feedback and control system design. Examples
from filter design and linear control. Prerequisite: MATH 53 or
ENGR 155A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Pauly, J)
EE 102B. Signal Processing and Linear Systems II
Concepts and mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing
and linear systems analysis with examples from digital signal
processing, communications, and control. Discrete-time signal
models. Continuous-discrete-continuous signal conversion. Discrete-
time impulse and step response. Frequency domain representations:
Fourier series and transforms. Connection between continuous
and discrete time frequency representations. Discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT). Digital
filter and signal processing examples. Discrete-time and hybrid
linear systems. Stability and causality. Z transforms and their connection
to Laplace transforms. Frequency response of discrete-time
systems. Discrete-time control. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Staff), Spr (Kahn, J), Sum (Staff)
EE 108A. Digital Systems I
Digital circuit, logic, and system design. Digital representation of
information. CMOS logic circuits. Combinational logic design.
Logic building blocks, idioms, and structured design. Sequential
logic design and timing analysis. Clocks and synchronization.
Finite state machines. Microcode control. Digital system design.
Control and datapath partitioning. Lab. Prerequisite: ENGR 40.
Corequisite for WIM: ENGR 102E. GER:DB-EngrAppSci, WIM
3-4 units, Aut (Mitra, S), Win (Mitra, S)
EE 108B. Digital Systems II
The design of processor-based digital systems. Instruction sets,
addressing modes, data types. Assembly language programming,
low-level data structures, introduction to operating systems and
compilers. Processor microarchitecture, microprogramming, pipelining.
Memory systems and caches. Input/output, interrupts, buses
and DMA. System design implementation alternatives, software/
hardware tradeoffs. Labs involve the design of processor
subsystems and processor-based embedded systems. Prerequisite:
108A, CS 106B. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Aut (Olukotun, O), Win (Dally, W)
EE 109. Digital Systems Design Lab
The design of integrated digital systems encompassing both customized
software and hardware. Software/hardware design tradeoffs.
Algorithm design for pipelining and parallelism. System latency
and throughput tradeoffs. FPGA optimization techniques.
Integration with external systems and smart devices. Firmware
configuration and embedded system considerations. Enrollment
limited to 25; preference to graduating seniors. Prerequisites:
108B, and CS 106B or X. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Weaver, J)
EE 114. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Analysis and simulation of elementary transistor stages, current
mirrors, supply- and temperature-independent bias, and reference
circuits. Overview of integrated circuit technologies, circuit components,
component variations and practical design paradigms.
Performance evaluation using computer-aided design tools. Prerequisite:
101B.GER:DB-EngrAppSci GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 116. Semiconductor Device Physics
The fundamental operation of semiconductor devices and overview
of applications. The physical principles of semiconductors, both
silicon and compound materials; operating principles and device
equations for junction devices (diodes, bipolar transistor, photodetectors).
Introduction to quantum effects and band theory of
solids. Prerequisite: ENGR 40. Corequisite: 101B. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Peumans, P)
EE 122A. Analog Circuits Laboratory
Practical applications of analog circuits, including simple amplifiers,
filters, oscillators, power supplies, and sensors. Design skills,
computer-aided design, and circuit fabrication and debugging. The
design process through proposing, designing, simulating, building,
debugging, and demonstrating a project. Radio frequency and
largely digital projects not suitable for EE 122. Prerequisite:
ENGR 40 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 122B. Introduction to Biomedical Electronics
Key components of modern systems, their application in physiology
measurements, and reduction to practice in labs. Fundamentals
of analog/digital conversion and filtering techniques for biosignals,
typical transducers (biopotential, electrochemical, temperature,
pressure, acoustic, movement), and interfacing circuits. Issues of
biomedical electronics (safety, isolation, noise). Prerequisite:
EE122A
3 units, Spr (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 124. Introduction to Neuroelectrical Engineering
Fundamental properties of electrical activity in neurons, technology
for measuring and altering neural activity, and operating principles
of modern neurological and neural prosthetic medical systems.
Topics: action potential generation and propagation, neuro-
MEMS and measurement systems, experimental design and statistical
data analysis, information encoding and decoding, clinical
diagnostic systems, and fully-implantable neural prosthetic systems
design. Prerequisite: EE 101B and EE 102B.
3 units, Win (Shenoy, K)
588 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
2010-11
EE 133. Analog Communications Design Laboratory
(Same as EE 233) Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude
modulation (AM) using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation
(FM) based on discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits
such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop
(PLL) techniques, characterization of key parameters, and their
applications. Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs
involve building and characterization of AM and FM modulation/
demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited to
30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: 101B.
Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and Graduate students
enroll in EE233. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 134. Introduction to Photonics
Photonics, optical sensors, and fiber optics. Conceptual and
mathematical tools for design and analysis of optical communication
and sensor systems. Experimental characterization of semiconductor
lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry,
fiber optic links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Class project
aimed on confocal microscopy for biomedical applications.
Laboratory experiments. Prerequisite: 41 or equivalent. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Staff)
EE 136. Introduction to Nanophotonics and Nanostructures
Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors.
Confining these waves, and devices employing such confinement.
Localization of light and applications: metallic mirrors, photonic
crystals, optical waveguides, microresonators, plasmonics.
Localization of quantum mechanical waves: quantum wells, wires,
and dots. Generation of light in semiconductors: spontaneous and
stimulated emission, lasers, and light emitting diodes. Devices
incorporating localization of both electromagnetic and quantum
mechanical waves such as resonant cavity quantum well lasers and
microcavity-based single photon sources. System-level applications
such as optical communications, biochemical sensing, and
quantum cryptography. Prerequisite: familiarity with electromagnetic
and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors at the
level of EE 41 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Vuckovic, J)
EE 140. The Earth From Space: Introduction to Remote Sensing
(Same as GEOPHYS 140) Global change science as viewed using
space remote sensing technology. Global warming, ozone depletion,
the hydrologic and carbon cycles, topographic mapping, and
surface deformation. Physical concepts in remote sensing. EM
waves and geophysical information. Sensors studied: optical, near
and thermal IR, active and passive microwave. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 141. Engineering Electromagnetics
Lumped versus distributed circuits. Transient response of transmission
lines with resistive and reactive loads. Reflection, transmission,
attenuation and dispersion. Steady-state waves on transmission
lines. Standing wave ratio, impedance matching, and
power flow. Coulomb's law, electrostatic field, potential and gradient,
electric flux and Gauss's Law and divergence. Metallic conductors,
Poisson's and Laplace's equations, capacitance, dielectric
materials. Electrostatic energy and forces. Steady electric currents,
Ohm's Law, Kirchoff's Laws, charge conservation and the continuity
equation, Joule's Law. Biot-Savart's law and the static magnetic
field. Ampere's Law and curl. Vector magnetic potential and magnetic
dipole. Magnetic materials, forces and torques. Faraday's
Law, magnetic energy, displacement current and Maxwell's equations.
Uniform plane waves. Prerequisites: 102A, MATH 52.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Hesselink, L)
EE 168. Introduction to Digital Image Processing
Computer processing of digital 2-D and 3-D data, combining theoretical
material with implementation of computer algorithms. Topics:
properties of digital images, design of display systems and
algorithms, time and frequency representations, filters, image formation
and enhancement, imaging systems, perspective, morphing,
and animation applications. Instructional computer lab exercises
implement practical algorithms. Final project consists of computer
animations incorporating techniques learned in class. Prerequisite:
Matlab programming. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, not given this year
EE 169. Introduction to Bioimaging
Bioimaging is important for both clinical medicine, and medical
researchIntroduction to several of the major imaging modalities,
using a signal processing perspective. Multi-dimensional Fourier
transforms, and image quality metrics. Projection imaging systems
(projection X-Ray), backprojection based systems (CT, PET, and
SPECT), systems that use beam forming (ultrasound), and systems
that use Fourier encoding (MRI).
3 units, Aut (Pauly, J)
EE 178. Probabilistic Systems Analysis
Introduction to probability and statistics and their role in modeling
and analyzing real world phenomena. Events, sample space, and
probability. Discrete random variables, probability mass functions,
independence and conditional probability, expectation and conditional
expectation. Continuous random variables, probability density
functions, independence and expectation, derived densities.
Transforms, moments, sums of independent random variables.
Simple random processes. Limit theorems. Introduction to statistics:
significance, hypothesis testing, estimation and detection,
Bayesian analysis. Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (El Gamal, A)
EE 179. Introduction to Communications
This course covers the design and performance analysis of both
analog and digital communication systems. Topics include current
communication systems (cellular, WLANs, radio and TV broadcasting,
satellites, Internet), Fourier techniques, energy and power
spectral density, random variables and random (noise) signals,
filtering and modulation of noise, analog modulation (AM and
FM) and its performance in noise, digital modulation (PSK and
FSK), optimal receiver design, and probability of bit error for digital
modulation. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Goldsmith, A)
EE 190. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual
or team activities involve lab experimentation, design of
devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 191. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given
for a letter grade only. If a letter grade given on the basis of required
written report or examination is not appropriate, enroll in
190.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
GRADUATE COURSES IN ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
Primarily for graduate students; undergraduates may enroll with
consent of instructor.
EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer
Seminar. For prospective entrepreneurs with an engineering background.
Contributions made to the business world by engineering
graduates. Speakers include Stanford and other engineering and
M.B.A. graduates who have founded large and small companies in
nearby communities. Contributions from EE faculty and other
departments including Law, Business, and MS&E.
1 unit, Win (Melen, R)
EE 204. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and
Computer Scientists
For graduate students with little or no business experience. Leading
computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and their
best practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions these
companies face. Corporate strategy, new product development,
marketing, sales, distribution, customer service, financial accounting,
outsourcing, and human behavior in business organizations.
Case studies. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
3 units, Spr (Gibbons, F; Siegel, M)
EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes
For students interested in the physical bases and practical methods
of silicon VLSI chip fabrication, or the impact of technology on
device and circuit design, or intending to pursue doctoral research
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 589
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
involving the use of Stanford's Nanofabrication laboratory. Process
simulators illustrate concepts and provide a virtual lab experience.
Topics: principles of integrated circuit fabrication processes, physical
and chemical models for crystal growth, oxidation, ion
implantation, etching, deposition, lithography, and back-end processing.
Required for 410.
3 units, Aut (Plummer, J)
EE 214. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits in advanced MOS
and bipolar technologies. Device operation and compact modeling
in support of circuit simulations needed for design. Emphasis is on
quantitative evaluations of performance using hand calculations
and circuit simulations; intuitive approaches to design. Analytical
and approximate treatments of noise and distortion; analysis and
design of feedback circuits. Design of archetypal analog blocks for
networking and communications such as broadband gain stages
and transimpedance amplifiers. Prerequisite: EE 114.
3 units, Win (Murmann, B)
EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices
Carrier generation, transport, recombination, and storage in semiconductors.
Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction,
heterojunction, metal semiconductor contact, bipolar junction transistor,
MOS capacitor, MOS and junction field-effect transistors,
and related optoelectronic devices such as CCDs, solar cells,
LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models that reflect physical
principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis and
design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.
3 units, Aut (Harris, J), Win (Saraswat, K; Howe, R)
EE 218. Introduction to Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics
Device physics and operation principles. Device and material options
beyond silicon FETs at the nanoscale. Topics identified by
the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors,
emerging research devices section; see http://public.itrs.net. Nonsilicon-
based devices such as carbon nanotubes, semiconductor
nanowires, and molecular devices; and non-FET based devices
such as single-electron transistors (SET), resonant tunneling diodes
(RTD), and quantum dots. Logic and memory devices. Sources
include current literature and reference books. Prerequisite: Undergraduate
device physics. Recommended: Introductory graduate
solid state physics.
3 units, not given this year
EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I
Emphasis is on applications in modern devices and systems. Topics
include: Schrödinger's equation, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues,
operator approach to quantum mechanics, Dirac notation,
angular momentum, hydrogen atom, perturbation theory, variational
method, and time-dependent perturbation theory with applications
to optical absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and
Fermi's golden rule. Prerequisites: MATH 52 and 53, PHYSICS 65
(or PHYSICS 43 and 45).
3 units, Aut (Miller, D)
EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II
Continuation of 222, including more advanced topics: quantum
mechanics of crystalline materials, methods for one-dimensional
problems, spin, systems of identical particles (bosons and fermions),
introductory quantum optics (electromagnetic field quantization,
coherent states), fermion annihilation and creation operators,
interaction of different kinds of particles (spontaneous emission,
optical absorption, and stimulated emission). Quantum information
and interpretation of quantum mechanics. Other topics in electronics,
optoelectronics, optics, and quantum information science. Prerequisite:
222.
3 units, Win (Miller, D)
EE 225. Bio-chips, Imaging and Nanomedicine
(Same as MATSCI 382) The course covers state-of-the-art and
emerging bio-sensors, bio-chips, imaging modalities, and nanotherapies
which will be studied in the context of human physiology
including the nervous system, circulatory system and immune
system. Medical diagnostics will be divided into bio-chips (in-vitro
diagnostics) and medical and molecular imaging (in-vivo imaging).
In-depth discussion on cancer and cardiovascular diseases
and the role of diagnostics and nano-therapies.
3 units, Win (Wang, S)
EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics
Topics: energy band theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering,
classical kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and
non-equilibrium semiconductor statistics. Prerequisite: course in
modern physics.
3 units, Aut (Fan, S)
EE 231. Introduction to Lasers
How lasers work, including quantum transitions in atoms, stimulated
emission and amplification, rate equations, saturation, feedback,
coherent optical oscillation, laser resonators, and optical
beams. Limited primarily to steady-state behavior; classical models
for atomic transitions with little quantum mechanics background
required. Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory to the level
of 142, preferably 241, and some atomic or modern physics such
as PHYSICS 70 or 130, 131.
3 units, Win (Digonnet, M)
EE 232. Laser Dynamics
Continuation of 231, emphasizing dynamic and transient effects
including spiking, Q-switching, mode locking, frequency modulation,
frequency and spatial mode competition, linear and nonlinear
pulse propagation, short pulse expansion, and compression. Prerequisite:
231.
3 units, not given this year
EE 233. Analog Communications Design Laboratory
(Same as EE 133) Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude
modulation (AM) using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation
(FM) based on discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits
such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop
(PLL) techniques, characterization of key parameters, and their
applications. Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs
involve building and characterization of AM and FM modulation/
demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited to
30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: 101B.
Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and Graduate students
enroll in EE233.
3-4 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 234. Photonics Laboratory
Photonics and fiber optics with a focus on communication and
sensing. Experimental characterization of semiconductor lasers,
optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links,
optical amplifiers, and optical sensors and photonic crystals. Prerequisite:
EE 242 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Vuckovic, J)
EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices
Guided wave optics, optical waveguide devices, and integrated
optics. Wave propagation in layered media, slab waveguides, and
optical fibers. Rectangular waveguides. Optical waveguide technology.
Coupled-mode theory. Numerical analysis of complex
waveguides. Photonic crystals and surface plasmon optics. Physics
and design of waveguide devices. Fiber sensors, waveguide gratings,
waveguide modulators, directional couplers, ring filters. Prerequisite:
electromagnetic theory to the level of 142 or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Fan, S)
EE 237. Solar Energy Conversion
Basics of solar energy conversion in photovoltaic devices and solar
thermal systems. Solar cell device physics: electrical and optical.
Solar system issues including module assembly, inverters, and
micro-inverters. Concentrated solar power. Students design solar
cells. Prerequisite: EE 116 or EE 216.
3 units, Win (Peumans, P)
EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves
Continuation of 141. Maxwell's equations. Plane waves in lossless
and lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of electromagnetic power
(Poynting's theorem). Reflection and refraction of waves at planar
boundaries. Snell's law and total internal reflection. Reflection and
refraction from lossy media. Guided waves. Parallel-plate and
dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow wave-guides, cavity resonators,
microstrip waveguides, optical fibers. Interaction of fields
with matter and particles. Antennas and radiation of electromagnetic
energy. Prerequisite: 141 or PHYSICS 120.
3 units, Win (Fraser-Smith, A)
EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor physics and optical processes in semiconductors.
Operating principles and practical device features of semiconductor
optoelectronic materials and heterostructures. Devices include:
590 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
2010-11
optical detectors (p-i-n, avalanche, and MSM); light emitting diodes;
electroabsorptive modulators (Franz-Keldysh and QCSE),
electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-Zehnder), switches
(SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical cavity surface emitting).
Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and solid state physics
such as EE 216 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Harris, J)
EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications
Fibers: single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion,
group-velocity dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear
effects in fibers: Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase
modulation, four-wave mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes,
laser diodes, transverse and longitudinal mode control, modulation,
chirp, linewidth, intensity noise. Modulators: electro-optic, electroabsorption.
Photodiodes: p-i-n, avalanche, responsivity, capacitance,
transit time. Receivers: high-impedance, transimpedance,
bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation formats: nonreturn-
to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance: Q factor, biterror
ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity degradations:
extinction ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion. Wavelengthdivision
multiplexing. System architectures: local-area, access,
metropolitan-area, long-haul. Prerequisites: 102A, 242 or consent
of instructor.
3 units, Aut (Kahn, J)
EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes
Fundamentals of statistic, Fourier analysis, statistical and quantum
mechanics, and linear and nonlinear circuit theory. Thermal, quantum
and 1/f noise in resistors, pn junctions, lasers, and parametric
amplifiers. Energy efficiency (bit/photon) and spectral efficiency
(bit/s/Hz) in coherent and single photon optical communications.
Protocols and security in quantum cryptography. Decoherence of
qubits in quantum computation. Prerequisites: elementary device,
circuit, and electromagnetic waves to the level of 101A,B and 242.
3 units, Aut (Yamamoto, Y)
EE 252. Antennas for Telecommunications and Remote Sensing
Fundamental properties. Dipoles, loops, reflectors, Yagis, helices,
slots, horns, micro-strips. Antennas as transitions between guided
and free radiation, ultrasound analogue. Famous antennas. Pattern
measurements. Friis and radar equations. Feeds, matching, baluns.
Broadbanding. Arrays, aperture synthesis, interferometry, verylong-
baseline interferometry. Thermal radiation, antenna temperature,
microwave passive remote sensing. Prerequisite: 242 or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 254. Principles of Radar Systems
Analysis and design. Radar equation and systems parameters,
components of radar systems, radar cross-section and target characteristics,
signal detection in noise, ambiguity function (with applications
to measurement precision, resolution, clutter rejection,
and waveform design); pulse compression waveforms, synthetic
aperture radar, tracking and scanning radars, HF (OTH) radar,
radar environmental and remote sensing, radar astronomy. Prerequisite:
senior or graduate standing.
3 units, not given this year
EE 256. Numerical Electromagnetics
Principles and applications of numerical techniques for solving
practical electromagnetics problems. Time domain solutions of
Maxwell's equations. Finite difference time domain (FDTD) methods.
Numerical stability, dispersion, and dissipation. Absorbing
boundary conditions. Perfectly matched layer methods. Explicit
and implicit methods. FDTD modeling of propagation and scattering
in dispersive and anisotropic media. Near-to-far-zone transformations.
Computational problems require programming and use
of MATLAB and other tools. Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 257. Scientific Data Processing
(Same as GEOPHYS 258) Assimilation, processing, and modeling
of large observational data sets. Solution of scientific and engineering
problems, especially those requiring large amounts of data.
Inverse methods and transform domain analysis for indirect measurements,
implemented on digital computers using scientific languages.
Large-scale computing, including hardware architectures,
input/output and data bus bandwidth, programming efficiency,
parallel programming techniques. Student projects involve analyzing
real data by implementing an observational system such as
tomography for medical and Earth observation uses, radar and
matched filtering, multispectral/multitemporal studies, or migration
processing. Prequisites: Programming with high level language
3-4 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications
The Fourier transform as a tool for solving physical problems.
Fourier series, the Fourier transform of continuous and discrete
signals and its properties. The Dirac delta, distributions, and generalized
transforms. Convolutions and correlations and applications;
probability distributions, sampling theory, filters, and analysis
of linear systems. The discrete Fourier transform and the FFT
algorithm. Multidimensional Fourier transform and use in imaging.
Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis is on
relating the theoretical principles to solving practical engineering
and science problems. Prerequisites: Math through ODEs, Fourier
series at the level of 102A, and linear algebra.
3 units, Aut (Osgood, B), Win (Gill, J), Sum (Staff)
EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging
Time and frequency representations, two-dimensional auto- and
cross-correlation, Fourier spectra, diffraction and antennas, coordinate
systems and the Hankel and Abel transforms, line integrals,
impulses and sampling, restoration in the presence of noise, reconstruction
and tomography, imaging radar. Tomographic reconstruction
using projection-slice and layergarm methods. Students
create software to form images using these techniques with actual
data. Final project consists of design and simulation of an advanced
imaging system. Prerequisite: 261. Recommended: 278,
279.
3 units, not given this year
EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems
(Same as CME 263) Applied linear algebra and linear dynamical
systems with application to circuits, signal processing, communications,
and control systems. Topics: least-squares approximations
of over-determined equations and least-norm solutions of underdetermined
equations. Symmetric matrices, matrix norm, and singular
value decomposition. Eigenvalues, left and right eigenvectors,
with dynamical interpretation. Matrix exponential, stability, and
asymptotic behavior. Multi-input/multi-output systems, impulse
and step matrices; convolution and transfer matrix descriptions.
Control, reachability, and state transfer; observability and leastsquares
state estimation. Prerequisites: linear algebra and matrices
as in MATH 103; differential equations and Laplace transforms as
in EE 102A.
3 units, Aut (Boyd, S), Spr (Lall, S)
EE 264. Digital Signal Processing
The fundamentals of digital signal processing techniques and their
applications. Topics include review of two sided Z-transform,
linear time invariant discrete-time systems, and sampling theory;
A/D and D/A conversion, rate conversion, and oversampling techniques
for ADC and DAC; filter design; quantization in digital
filter implementation; discrete Fourier analysis; and parametric
signal modeling. Prerequisite: EE102A and EE102B . Recommended:
EE261, EE278.
3 units, Win (Schafer, R), Sum (Staff)
EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory
Applying 102A,B to real-world signal processing applications. Lab
exercises use a programmable DSP to implement signal processing
tasks. Topics: A/D conversion and quantization, sampling theorem,
Z-transform, discrete-time Fourier transform, digital filter design
and implementation, spectral analysis, rate conversion, wireless
data communication, and OFDM receiver design. Prerequisites:
102A,B. Recommended: 261.
3-4 units, Spr (Meng, T)
EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics
Geometrical optics: ray matrices, Gaussian beams, optical instruments,
and radiometry. Wave nature of light: Maxwell's equations,
propagation through media with varying index of refraction (e.g.,
fibers). Interferometry: basic principles, practical systems, and
applications.
3 units, Aut (Byer, R)
EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems
Provides a quick introduction to MOS transistors and IC fabrication
and then creates abstractions to allow you to create and reason
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 591
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
about complex digital systems. It uses a switch resistor model of a
transistor, uses it to model gates, and then shows how gates and
physical layout can be synthesized from Verilog or SystemVerilog
descriptions. Most of the class will be spent on providing techniques
to create designs that can be validated, are low power, provide
good performance, and can be completed in finite time. Prerequisites:
101A and 108B; familiarity with transistors, logic design,
Verilog, and digital system organization.
3 units, Aut (Horowitz, M)
EE 272. Design Projects in VLSI Systems
Mixed signal design. Student teams create a small mixed-signal
VLSI design using a modern design flow and CAD tools. The
project involves writing a Verilog model of the chip, creating a
testing/debug strategy for the chip, wrapping custom layout to fit
into a std cell system, using synthesis and place and route tools to
create the layout of your chip, and understanding all the stuff you
need to do to tape-out a chip. Useful for those who plan to build a
chip in their Ph.D. work. Prerequisites: EE 271 and experience in
digital/analog circuit design.
3-4 units, Spr (Horowitz, M)
EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering
Electrical issues in the design of high-performance digital systems,
including signaling, timing, synchronization, noise, and power
distribution. High-speed signaling methods; noise in digital systems,
its effect on signaling, and methods for noise reduction; timing
conventions; timing noise (skew and jitter), its effect on systems,
and methods for mitigating timing noise; synchronization
issues and synchronizer design; clock and power distribution problems
and techniques; impact of electrical issues on system architecture
and design. Prerequisites: 102B and 108A, or equivalents.
Recommended: 214.
3 units, Win (Weaver, J)
EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications
Frequency reuse, cellular concepts, cochannel interference,
handoff. Radio propagation in and around buildings: Friis equation,
multipath, narrow-band and wide-band channels, small scale
and large-scale statistics, space and time signal variation. Diversity.
Receiver sensitivity, sources of noise, range. Performance
statistics: coverage, margin, digital modulation, adjacent channel
interference, and digital error rates. Wide band channels: maximum
transmission rates. Multi-server queuing and traffic: Erlang
formulas. Multiple access: FDMA, TDMA, CDMA; Duplexing:
TDD, FDD. Prerequisites: 242 and 278 or equivalent. Corequisite:
279 or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Cox, D)
EE 278. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing
Random variables, vectors, and processes; convergence and limit
theorems; IID, independent increment, Markov, and Gaussian
random processes; stationary random processes; autocorrelation
and power spectral density; mean square error estimation, detection,
and linear estimation. Prerequisites: 178 or STATS 116, and
linear systems and Fourier transforms at the level of 102A,B or
261.
3 units, Aut (Prabhakar, B), Win (Gray, R), Sum (Staff)
EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems
Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digital
modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion, multiplexing,
noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise ratio analysis,
probability of error in digital systems, spread spectrum. Prerequisites:
179 or 261, and 178 or 278.
3 units, Win (Cox, D)
EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture
Course focuses on how to build modern computing systems,
namely notebooks, smartphones, and data centers, covering primarily
their hardware architecture and certain system software
aspects. For each system class, we cover the system architecture,
processor technology, advanced memory hierarchy and I/O organization,
power and energy management, and reliability. We will
also cover topics such as interactions with system software, virtualization,
solid state storage, and security. The programming assignments
allow students to explore performance/energy tradeoffs
when using heterogeneous hardware resources on smartphone
devices. Prerequisite: EE108B. Recommended: CS 140.
3 units, Spr (Staff)
EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks
Structure and components of computer networks; functions and
services; packet switching; layered architectures; OSI reference
model; physical layer; data link layer; error control; window flow
control; media access control protocols used in local area networks
(Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI) and satellite networks; network
layer (datagram service, virtual circuit service, routing, congestion
control, Internet Protocol); transport layer (UDP, TCP); application
layer.
3 units, Aut (Tobagi, F)
EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290D. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains
Finite-state and countable-state Markov chains. Controlled Markov
chains and dynamic programming algorithms. Application to modeling
and analysis of engineering systems. Prerequisites: 263, 278.
3 units, not given this year
EE 292G. Switch Mode Power Conversion
Power conversion fundamentals including linear/shunt regulators,
charge pumps, Buck, Boost, Buck-Boost, SEPIC, Cuk, and Flyback
converters, magnetic components, volt second balance, continuous/
discontinuous mode, synchronous/non-synchronous operation,
voltage/current mode control, fixed frequency PWM and
constant on or off time control, control loop analysis, compensator
design, RMS/average value calculations for PWM current waveforms,
inductor, capacitor, and MOSFET parasitics, output ripple,
transient response, gate drive strategies, efficiency prediction, soft
start, current limit, efficiency and power loss plots. Prerequisites:
EE114
3 units, Spr (Leman, B)
EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
(Same as ENERGY 293A) For seniors and graduate students.
Thermodynamics, heat engines, thermoelectics, biomass. Recommended:
MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
3-4 units, Aut (Brandt, A)
EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
(Same as ENERGY 293B) For seniors and graduate students. Fuel
cells. Production of hydrogen: electrolytic, chemical, thermolytic,
photolytic. Hydrogen storage: hydrides. Photoelectric converters;
photo-thermovoltaic converters. Wind turbines. Recommended:
EE 293A; MATH 41; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
3 units, Win (da Rosa, A)
592 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
2010-11
EE 300. Master's Thesis and Thesis Research
Independent work under the direction of a department faculty.
Written thesis required for final letter grade. The continuing grade
'N' is given in quarters prior to thesis submission. See 390 if a letter
grade is not appropriate.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 302. Biomedical Electronics
Biomedical electronics and instruments based on electrical engineering
for diagnostics and therapeutic treatments of biological
systems, focusing on the theory and design principles in modern
biomedical electronics using electromagnetic properties. Topics
include circuit design for implanted medical devices, physics and
signal processing for medical imaging systems, techniques for
neural measurements and neuro-decoding, and electronics for drug
delivery. Prerequisites: EE 214, 264,and 265.
3 units, Win (Poon, A)
EE 303. Autonomous Implantable Systems
How implantable systems can revolutionize health care in the coming
decades. Potential applications include implantable sensors and
monitoring devices for preventive and post-surgery monitoring;
drug delivery systems that can be placed closer to cancer cells and
are able to administer dosage automatically; medical robots that
perform surgery inside patients with greater precision and less
pain; and neural implants for brain-machine interface. Focus is on
the analysis and design of remotely-powered, miniature implantable
devices for those applications. Prerequisites: EE114
3 units, Spr (Poon, A)
EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology
Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of
nanoelectric devices. Topics identified by the International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research devices
sec-tion; see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based devices such
as carbon nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor na-nowires, and
molecular devices; and non-FET based devices such as single electron
transistors (SET) and resonant tunneling diodes (RTD). Logic
and memory devices are covered. Prerequisite: undergra-duate
device physics, EE 222, EE 216. Recommended: EE 212, EE 223,
EE 228, EE 311, and EE 316 Offered Alternate years. Offered in
Spring, 2011 Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 212, 311, 316.
3 units, alternate years, not given this year
EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar
State-of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, advanced
materials, and nanoscience for device applications. Prerequisites:
EE216, EE316.
1 unit, Win (Nishi, Y; Wong, P; Saraswat, K)
EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuits Technology
What are the practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of
the technology of modern MOS devices and interconnects? How
are modern devices and circuits fabricated and what future changes
are likely? Advanced techniques and models of MOS devices and
back-end (interconnect and contact) processing. What are future
device structures and materials to maintain progress in integrated
electronics? MOS front-end and back-end process integration.
Prerequisites: EE212, EE216 or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Saraswat, K)
EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators
Solid-state sensors and actuators, focusing on the use of integrated
circuit fabrication technology for their realization. Categories of
sensors and actuators include biological, chemical, mechanical,
optical, and thermal. Mechanisms of transduction, fabrication
techniques, and relative merits of different technologies. Micromachining
techniques for monolithic integration of active circuits
with sensors or actuators. Directions for future research. Prerequisite:
212 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits
Looks a little more deeply at how digital circuits operate, what
makes a gate digital, and how to ""cheat"" to improve performance
or power. To aid this analysis we create a number of different
models for MOS transistors and choose the simplest one that can
explain our the circuit's operation, using both hand and computer
analysis. We explore static, dynamic, pulse-mode, and current
mode logic, and show how they are are used in SRAM design.
Topics include sizing for min delay, noise and noise margins,
power dissipation. The class uses memory design (SRAM) as a
motivating example. DRAM and EEPROM design issues are also
covered. Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended: 271.
3 units, Win (Staff)
EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design
Design of RF integrated circuits for communications systems,
primarily in CMOS. Topics: the design of matching networks and
low-noise amplifiers at RF, mixers, modulators, and demodulators;
review of classical control concepts necessary for oscillator design
including PLLs and PLL-based frequency synthesizers. Design of
low phase noise oscillators. Design of high-efficiency (e.g., class
E, F) RF power amplifiers, coupling networks. Behavior and modeling
of passive and active components at RF. Narrowband and
broadband amplifiers; noise and distortion measures and mitigation
methods. Overview of transceiver architectures. Prerequisite: 214.
3 units, Spr (Lee, T)
EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits
Design and analysis of integrated circuits for active filters, precision
gain stages, and sensor interfaces in CMOS VLSI technology.
Operational transconductance amplifiers; sampled-data and continuous-
time analog filters. Analysis of noise and amplifier imperfections;
compensation techniques such as correlated double sampling.
Sensor interfaces for micro-electromechanical and biomedical
applications. Layout techniques for analog integrated circuits.
Prerequisites: EE214
3 units, Spr (Murmann, B)
EE 315B. VLSI Data Conversion Circuits
Architectural and circuit level design and analysis of integrated
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS VLSI
technology. Fundamental circuit elements such as sampling circuits
and voltage comparators. Circuits and architectures for Nyquist-
rate and oversampling analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog
conversion; digital decimation and interpolation filters. Examples
of calibration and digital enhancement techniques. Prerequisite: EE
214. Recommended: EE 315A.
3 units, Aut (Murmann, B)
EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices
In modern VLSI technologies, device electrical characteristics are
sensitive to structural details and therefore to fabrication techniques.
How are advanced VLSI devices designed and what future
changes are likely? What are the implications for device electrical
performance caused by fabrication techniques? Physical models
for nanometer scale structures, control of electrical characteristics
(threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic transport) in
small structures, and alternative device structures for VLSI. Prerequisites:
212 and 216, or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Wong, P)
EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits
The fundamentals of generating submicron patterns in integrated
circuit manufacturing. Technologies include the formation of submicron
images of ultraviolet light, the resulting exposure of polymeric
resists, the subsequent development of resist patterns and
their transfer into functional circuit material patterns through
plasma etching and other techniques. Use of phase-shifting masks
and other wavefront-engineering approaches. Hands-on computer
simulations. Prerequisites: 141 or equivalent, 212 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology
Recent advances in materials science, device physics and structures,
and processing technology, to extend VLS1 device scaling
towards atomistic and quantum-mechanical physics boundaries.
Topics include: mobility-enhancement techniques; nanomaterial
structures including tube, wire, beam, and crystal; conducting
polymer; 3D FET; gate-wraparound FET; nonvolatile memory
phenomena and devices; self-assembly; flash annealing; plasma
doping; and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.
3 units, not given this year
EE 320. Nanoelectronics
Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of
nanoelectric devices. Topics identified by the International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research devices
section; see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based devices such as
carbon nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor nanowires, and molecular
devices; and non-FET based devices such as single electron
transistors (SET) and resonant tunneling diodes (RTD). Logic and
memory devices. Offered alternative years. Prerequisites: underSTANFORD
BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 593
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
graduate device physics, EE 222, 216. Recommended: EE 223,
228, or 316.
3 units, Spr (Wong, P)
EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics
Physics of charge and energy transfer in molecular systems and
connection with traditional mesoscopic transport theories. Analysis
of molecular organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells and
transistors. Technology and applications of molecular semiconductors.
Prerequisite: 228 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials
Modern semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are based on
unique energy band, carrier transport, and optical properties of
semiconductor materials. How to choose these properties for operation
of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is on quantum
mechanical foundations of the properties of solids, energy bandgap
engineering, semi-classical transport theory, semi-conductor statistics,
carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport effects, high field
ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation, quantum mechanical
transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and nonradiative
recombination that are the foundations of modern transistors
and optoelectronic devices. Prerequisites: EE216 or equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Harris, J)
EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices
Principles governing the operation of modern semiconductor devices.
Assumptions and approximations commonly made in analyzing
devices. Emphasis is on the application of semiconductor
physics to the development of advanced semiconductor devices
such as heterojunctions, HJ-bipolar transistors, HJ-FETs, nanostructures,
tunneling, single electron transistor and photonic devices.
Use of SENTARUS, a 2-D Poisson solver, for simulation of
ultra-small devices. Examples related to state-of-the-art devices
and current device research. Prerequisite: 216. Recommended:
316.
3 units, not given this year
EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces
Physical concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques
probing the electronic and chemical structure of surfaces, interfaces
and nanomaterials. Microscopic and atomic models of microstructures;
applications including semiconductor device technology,
catalysis and energy. Physical processes of UV and X¿ray
photoemission spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy, surface
EXAFS, low energy electron diffraction, electron/photon stimulated
ion desorption, scanning tunneling spectroscopy, ion scattering,
energy loss spectroscopy and related imaging methods; and
experimental aspects of these surface science techniques. Prerequisites:
PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of instructor.
3 units, Aut (Pianetta, P)
EE 334. Micro and Nano Optical Device Design
Lecture and project course on design and analysis of optical devices
with emphasis on opportunities and challenges created by
scaling to the micrometer and nanometer ranges. The emphasis is
on fundamentals, combined with some coverage of practical implementations.
Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent
3 units, Aut (Solgaard, O)
EE 336. Nanophotonics
(Same as MATSCI 346) Recent developments in micro- and nanophotonic
materials and devices. Basic concepts of photonic crystals.
Integrated photonic circuits. Photonic crystal fibers. Superprism
effects. Optical properties of metallic nanostructures. Subwavelength
phenomena and plasmonic excitations. Meta-materials.
Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.
3 units, Win (Fan, S; Brongersma, M)
EE 340. Optical micro- and nano-cavities
Optical micro- and nano-cavities and their device applications.
Types of optical cavities (microdisks, microspheres, photonic crystal
cavities, plasmonic cavities), and their electromagnetic properties,
design, and fabrication techniques. Cavity quantum electrodynamics:
strong and weak-coupling regime, Purcell factor, spontaneous
emission control. Applications of optical cavities, including
low-threshold lasers, optical modulators, quantum information
processing devices, and bio-chemical sensors. Prerequisites: advanced
undergraduate or basic graduate-level knowledge of electromagnetics,
quantum mechanics, and physics of semiconductors.
3 units, Spr (Vuckovic, J)
EE 343. Advanced Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor quantum well structures; superlattices and coupled
quantum wells; optical properties of quantum wells; valence band
structure; effects of strain; quantum well lasers; intersubband detectors;
excitons in quantum wells; absorption saturation; electroabsorption;
quantum well modulators and switches. Prerequisites:
222 or equivalent quantum mechanics, 243. Recommended: 223.
3 units, not given this year
EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory
Lecture/lab emphasizing lab. Techniques in the 1MHz-1GHz range
useful in designing and measuring oscillators, amplifiers, and mixers.
High frequency measurement techniques including sparameter
measurements, amplifier noise figure, and oscillator
phase noise. Guest speakers from Lucent and Hewlett-Packard.
Enrollment limited to 25. Prerequisites: transmission lines, Smith
charts. Recommended: 314.
3 units, Aut (Scherer, D; Swain, H; Cox, D)
EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory
Experimental techniques in optical fiber communications and networking.
Experimental investigation of key optical communications
components including fibers, lasers, modulators, photodiodes,
optical amplifiers, and WDM multiplexers and demultiplexers.
Fundamental optical communications systems techniques:
eye diagrams, BER measurements, experimental evaluation of
nonlinearties. Prerequisites: Undergraduate physics and optics.
3 units, Spr (Kazovsky, L)
EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics
Wave propagation in anisotropic, nonlinear, and time-varying media.
Microscopic and macroscopic description of electric dipole
susceptibilities. Free and forced waves-phasematching; slowly
varying envelope approximation-dispersion, diffraction, spacetime
analogy; harmonic generation; frequency conversion; parametric
amplification and oscillation; electro-optic light modulation;
nonlinear processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites: 141, 242.
3 units, Spr (Fejer, M)
EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science
Design and understanding of modern optical systems. Topics:
geometrical optics; aberration theory; systems layout; applications
such as microscopes, telescopes, optical processors. Computer ray
tracing program as a design tool. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications
Optical amplifiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor amplifiers.
Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. System applications: preamplified
receiver performance, amplifier chains. Raman amplifiers,
lumped vs. distributed amplification. Group-velocity dispersion
management: dispersion-compensating fibers, filters, gratings.
Interaction of dispersion and nonlinearity, dispersion maps. Multichannel
systems. Wavelength-division multiplexing components:
filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk. Time, subcarrier,
code and polarization-division multiplexing. Comparison of modulation
techniques: differential phase-shift keying, phase-shift keying,
quadrature-amplitude modulation. Comparison of detection
techniques: noncoherent, differentially coherent, coherent. Prerequisite:
247.
3 units, not given this year
EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics
Coupled wave analysis of periodic structures, gratings structures
for optical communcations, wave-matter interactions with periodic
media and photonic crystals, applications of periodic structures.
Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Hesselink, L)
594 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
2010-11
EE 350. STARLab Seminar
Research topics from space physics, planetary exploration, ionospheric
and magnetospheric physics, radar and remote sensing of
the environment, applied electromagnetics, waves in optical fibers,
and information systems with space applications. Applied research
areas include wireless personal communications, high bandwidth
wired and wireless transmission, optical communication systems,
sensor networks, and related underlying and advancing technologies.
1 unit, not given this year
EE 354. Introduction to Radio Wave Scattering
Integral and differential equations of radio wave scattering; exact,
approximate, and numerical solutions of single particle scattering
for spheres, edges, points, and cylinders. Scattering from rough
surfaces with large and small roughness scales, as time permits.
Multiple scattering; formulation and solution techniques for equation
of transfer in discrete media and scattering by continuous
media in weak and strong regimes. Applications to radar, radar
astronomy, remote sensing, and biological media. Prerequisites:
electromagnetic theory through standard graduate engineering
topics; partial differential equations, boundary value problems in
rectangular and spherical coordinates; and consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications
(Same as GEOPHYS 265) Radar remote sensing, radar image
characteristics, viewing geometry, range coding, synthetic aperture
processing, correlation, range migration, range/Doppler algorithms,
wave domain algorithms, polar algorithm, polarimetric
processing, interferometric measurements. Applications: surfafe
deformation, polarimetry and target discrimination, topographic
mapping surface displacements, velocities of ice fields. Prerequisites:
EE261
3 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and Applications
Plasmas in nature and industry. Single particle motions. Plasma
kinetic theory. Boltzmann equation and its moments. Cold and
warm plasma models. Plasma as a fluid. Magnetohydrodynamics.
Plasma conductivity and diffusion. Langmuir oscillations. Debye
shielding. Plasma sheath. Waves in cold, magnetized, warm, and
hot plasmas. Electron and ion waves. MHD waves. Landau damping.
Nonlinear effects. Applications in industry and space science.
Prerequisite: 242 or PHYSICS 122.
3 units, not given this year
EE 359. Wireless Communications
This course will cover advanced topics in wireless communications
for voice, data, and multimedia. Topics include: an overview
of current and future wireless systems; wireless channel models
including path loss, shadowing, and statistical multipath channel
models; fundamental capacity limits of wireless channels; digital
modulation and its performance in fading and intersymbol interference;
techniques to combat fading including adaptive modulation,
diversity, and multiple antenna systems (MIMO); techniques to
combat intersymbol interference including equalization, multicarrier
modulation (OFDM), and spread spectrum; and an overview of
wireless network design. Prerequisite: 279.
3-4 units, Aut (Goldsmith, A)
EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems
Continuation of 263. Optimal control and dynamic programming;
linear quadratic regulator. Lyapunov theory and methods. Linear
estimation and the Kalman filter. Perron-Frobenius theory. Examples
and applications from digital filters, circuits, signal processing,
and control systems. Prerequisites: 263 or equivalent; basic
probability.
3 units, not given this year
EE 364A. Convex Optimization I
(Same as CME 364A) Convex sets, functions, and optimization
problems. The basics of convex analysis and theory of convex
programming: optimality conditions, duality theory, theorems of
alternative, and applications. Least-squares, linear and quadratic
programs, semidefinite programming, and geometric programming.
Numerical algorithms for smooth and equality constrained
problems; interior-point methods for inequality constrained problems.
Applications to signal processing, communications, control,
analog and digital circuit design, computational geometry, statistics,
machine learning, and mechanical engineering. Prerequisite:
linear algebra such as 263.
3 units, Win (Boyd, S)
EE 364B. Convex Optimization II
(Same as CME 364B) Continuation of 364. Subgradient, cuttingplane,
and ellipsoid methods. Decentralized convex optimization
via primal and dual decomposition. Exploiting problem structure in
implementation. Convex relaxations of hard problems. Global
optimization via branch and bound. Robust and stochastic optimization.
Applications in areas such as control, circuit design, signal
processing, and communications. Substantial project. Prerequisite:
364A.
3 units, Spr (Boyd, S)
EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics
Applications of Fourier theory to the analysis and synthesis of
optical imaging and optical data processing systems. Propagation
and diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer approximations,
Fourier transforming properties of lenses, image formation with
coherent and incoherent light, transform functions of imaging systems,
optical data processing, and holography. Prerequisite: familiarity
with Fourier analysis. Recommended: 261.
3 units, not given this year
EE 368. Digital Image Processing
Image sampling and quantization color, point operations, segmentation,
morphological image processing, linear image filtering and
correlation, image transforms, eigenimages, multiresolution image
processing, wavelets, noise reduction and restoration, feature extraction
and recognition tasks, image registration. Emphasis is on
the general principles of image processing. Students write and
investigate image processing algorithms in Matlab. Term project.
Prerequisites: 261, 278.
3 units, Spr (Girod, B)
EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I
Imaging internal structures within the body using high-energy
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities covered: xray,
computed tomography, and nuclear medicine. Analysis of
existing and proposed systems in terms of resolution, frequency
response, detection sensitivity, noise, and potential for improved
diagnosis. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, Win (Nishimura, D)
EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II
Imaging internal structures within the body using non-ionizing
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities include
ultrasound and magnetic resonance. Analysis of ultrasonic systems
including diffraction and noise. Analysis of magnetic resonance
systems including physics, Fourier properties of image formation,
and noise. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, Spr (Nishimura, D)
EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction
Reconstruction problems from medical imaging, including magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and
positron emission tomography (PET). Problems include reconstruction
from non-uniform frequency domain data, automatic
deblurring, phase unwrapping, reconstruction from incomplete
data, and reconstruction from projections. Prerequisite: 369B.
3 units, not given this year
EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design
Design of high-performance digital systems, the things that cause
them to fail, and how to avoid these problems. Topics will focus
on current issues including: wiring resistance and how to deal with
it, power and Gnd noise and regulation, clock (or asynchronous)
system design and how to minimize clocking overhead, high-speed
I/O design, energy minimization including leakage control, and
structuring your Verilog code to result in high-performance, low
energy systems. Extensive use of modern CAD tools. Prerequisites:
271 and 313, or consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 374. Inference in Graphical Models
Probabilistic models with sparse graphical structures, lowcomplexity
inference algorithms, and their analysis. Algorithmic
methods: variational inference; message passing algorithms; belief
propagation; generalized belief propagation; survey propagation.
Learning graphical models, structural learning. Applications/
examples include: Gaussian models with sparse inverse covariance;
hidden Markov models (Viterbi and BCJR algorithms,
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 595
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE) COURSES
Kalman filter); computer vision (segmentation, tracking, etc); constraint
satisfaction problems; machine learning (clustering, classification);
communications. Prerequisite: 278, STATS 116, or CS
228. Recommended: 376A or STATS 217/218.
3 units, not given this year
EE 376A. Information Theory
(Same as STATS 376A) The fundamental ideas of information
theory. Entropy and intrinsic randomness. Data compression to the
entropy limit. Huffman coding. Arithmetic coding. Channel capacity,
the communication limit. Gaussian channels. Kolmogorov
complexity. Asymptotic equipartition property. Information theory
and Kelly gambling. Applications to communication and data
compression. Prerequisite: EE178 or EE278 or STATS 116, or
equivalent.
3 units, Win (Cover, T)
EE 376B. Information Theory
(Same as STATS 376B) Rate distortion theory and Kolmogorov
complexity. Information theory and statistics. Method of types.
Stein's lemma. AEP. Information capacity of networks. Slepian-
Wolf theorem. Optimal investment and information theory. Universal
portfolios and universal data compression. Maximum entropy
and Burg's theorem. Prerequisite: EE376A.
3 units, Spr (Cover, T)
EE 378A. Statistical Signal Processing
Random signals in electrical engineering. Discrete-time random
processes: stationarity and ergodicity, covariance sequences, power
spectral density, parametric models for stationary processes.
Fundamentals of linear estimation: minimum mean squared error
estimation, optimum linear estimation, orthogonality principle, the
Wold decomposition. Causal linear estimation of stationary processes:
the causal Wiener filter, Kalman filtering. Parameter estimation:
criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher information,
Cramer-Rao inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality, maximum
likelihood estimation, method of moments, consistency, efficiency.
ARMA parameter estimation: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-
Durbin algorithm, least squares estimation, moving average parameter
estimation, modified Yule-Walker method for model order
selection. Spectrum estimation: sample covariances, covariance
estimation, Bartlett formula, periodogram, periodogram averaging,
windowed periodograms. Prerequisites: EE 278
3 units, Win (Weissman, I)
EE 378B. Inference, Estimation, and Information Processing
Techniques and models for signal, data and information processing,
with emphasis on incomplete data, non-ordered index sets and
robust low-complexity methods. Linear models; regularization and
shrinkage; dimensionality reduction; streaming algorithms; sketching;
clustering, search in high dimension; low-rank models; principal
component analysis. Applications include: positioning from
pairwise distances; distributed sensing; measurement/traffic monitoring
in networks; finding communities/clusters in networks; recommendation
systems; inverse problems. Prerequisites: EE278 and
EE263 or equivalent. Recommended but not required: EE378 A
3 units, Spr (Montanari, A)
EE 379. Digital Communication
Modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, baseband and
passband system analysis, minimum-probability-of-error and
maximum-likelihood detection, error-probability analysis, intersymbol
interference, maximum-likelihood sequence detection,
equalization methods, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing.
Prerequisite: EE102B, EE278
3 units, Win (Kahn, J)
EE 380. Colloquium on Computer Systems
Live presentations of current research in the design, implementation,
analysis, and applications of computer systems. Topics range
over a wide range and are different every quarter. Topics may
include fundamental science, mathematics, cryptography, device
physics, integrated circuits, computer architecture, programming,
programming languages, optimization, applications, simulation,
graphics, social implications, venture capital, patent and copyright
law, networks, computer security, and other topics of related to
computer systems.
1 unit, Aut (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Win (Allison, D; Freeman,
J), Spr (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Sum (Allison, D; Freeman, J)
EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture
Provides in-depth coverage of fundamental architecture and implementation
techniques for modern processor chips. Course covers
topics such as advanced pipelining, superscalar execution, outof-
order processing, speculative execution, VLIW, data parallelism,
multithreading, graphics processors, and multi-core chips. The
students will become familiar with complex trade-offs between
performance-power-complexity and the common techniques for
addressing the challenges in historical and modern processors. A
central part of EE382A is a group project on an open research
question. Prerequisites: EE108B, CS140. Recommended: EE282,
CS315A
3 units, Aut (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 382C. Interconnection Networks
The architecture and design of interconnection networks used to
communicate from processor to memory, from processor to processor,
and in switches and routers. Topics: network topology, routing
methods, flow control, router microarchitecture, and performance
analysis. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.
3 units, Spr (Dally, W)
EE 382D. Advanced Computer Arithmetic
Number systems, floating point representation, state of the art in
arithmetic algorithms, problems in the design of high speed arithmetic
units. Prerequisite: 282.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards
Local area networks addressing and switching; IEEE 802.1 bridging
protocols (transparent bridging, virtual LANs). Internet routing
protocols: interior gateways (RIP, OSPF) and exterior gateways
(BGP); multicast routing; multiprotocol label switching (MPLS).
Routing in mobile networks: Mobile IP, Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
(MANET), Wireless Mesh Networks. Prerequisite: 284 or CS 144.
3 units, Win (Tobagi, F)
EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet
Applications and requirements. Traffic generation and characterization:
voice encoding (G.711, G.729, G.723); image and video
compression (JPEG, H.261, MPEG-2, H.263, H.264), TCP data
traffic. Quality impairments and measures. Networking technologies:
LAN technologies; home broadband services (ADSL, cable
modems, PONs); and wireless LANs (802.11). Network protocols
for multimedia applications: resource reservation (ST2+, RSVP);
differentiated services (DiffServ); and real-time transport protocol
(RTP, RTCP). Audio-video-data conferencing standards: Internet
architecture (SDP, SAP, SIP); ITU recommendations (H.320,
H.323 and T.120); and real-time streaming protocol (RTSP). Prerequisite:
284 or CS 144. Recommended: 384A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384C. Wireless Local Area Networks
Characteristics of wireless communication: multipath, noise, and
interference. Communications techniques: spread-spectrum,
CDMA, and OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical layer specifications:
FHSS, DSSS, IEEE 802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g (OFDM).
IEEE 802.11 media access control protocols: carrier sense multiple
access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), point coordination
function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated services. IEEE
802.11 network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure modes,
access point functionality. Management functions: synchronization,
power management and association. Current research papers
in the open literature. Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.
3 units, Spr (Tobagi, F)
EE 384E. Wireless Networking
(Same as CS 244E) Design and implementation of wireless networks
and mobile systems. The course will commence with a short
retrospective of wireless communication and initially touch on
some of the fundamental physical layer properties of various wireless
communication technologies. The focus will then shift to design
of media access control and routing layers for various wireless
systems. The course will also examine adaptations necessary at
transport and higher layers to cope with node mobility and errorprone
nature of the wireless medium. Finally, it will conclude with
a brief overview of other related issues including emerging wireless/
mobile applications. Prerequisites: EE 284
3 units, Win (Katti, S; Levis, P)
596 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
2010-11
EE 384M. Network Science
Modern large-scale networks consist of (i) Information Networks,
such as the Web and Social Networks, and (ii) Data Centers, which
are networks interconnecting computing and storage elements for
servicing the users of an Information Network. This course is concerned
with the mathematical models and the algorithms used in
Information Networks and Data Centers. Prerequisite: 278 or CS
365.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384P. Projects: The Programmable Open Mobile Internet
(POMI)
A new Stanford research program in EE and CS to define the next
generation of mobile computing: from the handheld device and its
operating system to the network, radios, and cloud computing that
supports the user. Small student teams prototype part of the next
Internet architecture. Emphasis is on how the Internet can support
billions of mobile users. Prerequisite: EE 284, CS 244A, CS 144,
or equivalents, and programming skills.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384S. Performance Engineering of Computer Systems and
Networks
Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance network
engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic modeling,
queueing networks and congestion management, dynamic
programming and task/processor scheduling, network dimensioning
and optimization, and simulation methods. Applications for
design of high-performance architectures for wireline/wireless
networks and the Internet, including: traffic modeling, admission
and congestion control, quality of service support, power control in
wireless networks, packet scheduling in switches, video streaming
over wireless links, and virus/worm propagation dynamics and
countermeasures. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisites: basic
networking technologies and probability.
3 units, Spr (Bambos, N)
EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures I
The theory and practice of designing packet switches, such as Internet
routers, and Ethernet switches. Introduction: evolution of
switches and routers. Output queued switches: motivation and
methods for providing bandwidth and delay guarantees. Switching:
output queueing, parallelism in switches, distributed shared memory
switches, input-queued switches, combined input-output
queued switches, how to make fast packet buffers, buffered crossbar
switches. Scheduling input queued crossbars: connections with
bipartite graph matching, algorithms for 100% throughput, practical
algorithms and heuristics. Looking forward: Architectures and
switches for data center networks. Prerequisites: EE284 or CS
244A. Recommended: EE 178 or EE 278 or STAT 116.
3 units, not given this year
EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar
Student/faculty discussions of research problems in the design of
reliable digital systems. Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for
testability, production testing, and system reliability. Emphasis is
on student presentations and Ph.D. thesis research. May be repeated
for credit. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
1-4 units, Aut (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Win (McCluskey, E;
Mitra, S), Spr (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Sum (McCluskey, E)
EE 386. Robust System Design
Causes of system malfunctions; techniques for building robust
systems that avoid or are resilient to such malfunctions through
built-in error detection and correction, prediction, self-test, selfrecovery,
and self-repair; case studies and new research problems.
Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.
3 units, Spr (Mitra, S)
EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes
Theory and implementation of algebraic codes for detection and
correction of random and burst errors. Introduction to finite fields.
Linear block codes, cyclic codes, Hamming codes, BCH codes,
Reed-Solomon codes. Decoding algorithms for BCH and Reed-
Solomon codes. Prerequisites: elementary probability, linear algebra.
3 units, Aut (Gill, J)
EE 388. Modern Coding Theory
Tools for analysis and optimization of iterative coding systems.
LDPC, turbo and, RA codes. Optimized ensembles, message passing
algorithms, density evolution, and analytic techniques. Prerequisite:
376A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual
or team activities may involve lab experimentation, design
of devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written
report or written examination required. Letter grade given on the
basis of the report; if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 392J. Digital Video Processing
Spatio-temporal sampling, motion analysis, parametric motion
models, motion-compensated filtering, and video processing operations
including noise reduction, restoration, superresolution,
deinterlacing and video sampling structure conversion, and compression
(frame-based and object-based methods). Video segmentation
and layered video representations, video streaming, compressed-
domain video processing, and digital TV. Prerequisite:
368.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug
Seminars by industry professionals in digital IC manufacturing test
and silicon debug. Topics include yield and binsplit modeling,
defect types and detection, debug hardware, physical analysis, and
design for test/debug circuits. Case studies of silicon failures. Prerequisite:
basic digital IC design (271 or 371).
1 unit, Win (Stinson, J)
EE 392V. Signal Processing in VoIP Systems
VoIP protocols: RTP and SIP. Voice encoding standards: PCM,
ADPCM, and LPC. Speech quality measurement: MOS, PESQ,
and E-model. Characterization of VoIP impairments: delay, jitter,
packet loss, and clock skew. Signal processing algorithms to improve
VoIP quality: echo cancellation, adaptive jitter buffering,
packet loss concealment, and decoder clock synchronization. Prerequisites:
261 and 278, or equivalents.
3 units, not given this year
EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching
Open to advanced EE graduate students who plan to make teaching
their career. Students conduct a section of an established course
taught in parallel by an experienced instructor. Enrollment limited.
1-15 units, Aut (Nishimura, D), Win (Nishimura, D), Spr (Nishimura,
D)
EE 398A. Image and Video Compression
Replaces EE398. The principles of source coding for the efficient
storage and transmission of still and moving images. Entropy and
lossless coding techniques. Run-length coding and fax compression.
Arithmetic coding. Rate-distortion limits and quantization.
Lossless and lossy predictive coding. Transform coding, JPEG.
Subband coding, wavelets, JPEG2000. Motion-compensated coding,
MPEG. Students investigate image and video compression
algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project. Prerequisites: 261, 278.
3 units, Win (Girod, B)
EE 398B. Video Communication Systems
Explore multimedia networking and communication, with emphasis
on systems for video delivery. In-depth discussion of video
coding techniques. Standards: MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, ITUT
H.261, H.263, H264. Coder control, rate adaptation, Scalable
video. Error resilient coding. Network adaptive video transport.
Distributed coding, authentication, watermarking. Videoconferencing,
digital TV broadcasting, HDTV, Internet media streaming,
IPTV, digital cinema, mobile media systems. Peer-to-peer media
delivery. Video summarization and retrieval. Students investigate
video coding algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project.Prerequisite:
EE 398A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research
Limited to candidates for the degree of Engineer or Ph.D.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management
Theme for Autumn 2010 is Asia technology management in energy
and cleantech technology and business trends, innovations,
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2010-11 | 597
ENERGY RESOURCES ENGINEERING (ENERGY) COURSES
and challenges such as standards, IPR, and differing regulatory
regimes in major Asian economies. Implications for US firms and
researchers. Distinguished speakers from industry and government.
1 unit, Aut (Dasher, R)
EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology Research
Theme for Spring 2011 is recent approaches to chip-level integration.
Survey of advanced research into 3D integration, CMOS on
encapsulated MEMS, III-V on Si, multi-processor architectures.
Distinguished speakers from industry and universities. May be
repeated for credit. Recommended: basic electronics.
1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)
EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries
Distinctive patterns and challenges of entrepreneurship in Asia;
update of business and technology issues in the creation and
growth of start-up companies in major Asian economies. Distinguished
speakers from industry, government, and academia.
1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)
EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory
Fabrication, simulation, and testing of a submicron CMOS process.
Practical aspects of IC fabrication including silicon wafer cleaning,
photolithography, etching, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation,
chemical vapor deposition, physical sputtering, and electrical testing.
Students also simulate the CMOS process using process simulator
TSUPREM4 of the structures and electrical parameters that
should result from the process flow. Taught in the Stanford Nanofabrication
Facility (SNF). Preference to students pursuing doctoral
research program requiring SNF facilities. Enrollment limited
to 20. Prerequisites: 212, 216, consent of instructor.
3-4 units, Win (Saraswat, K)
EE 412. Advanced Nanofabrication Laboratory
Experimental projects and seminars on integrated circuit fabrication
using epitaxial, oxidation, diffusion, evaporation, sputtering,
and photolithographic processes with emphasis on techniques for
achieving advanced device performance. May be repeated for additional
credit. Prerequisites: ENGR341 or EE410 or consent of
instructor.
3 units, Aut (Howe, R; Solgaard, O), Win (Pruitt, B)
EE 414. RF Transceiver Design Laboratory
Students design, build, and test GHz transceivers using microstrip
construction techniques and discrete components. The design,
construction, and experimental characterization of representative
transceiver building blocks: low noise amplifiers (LNAs), diode
ring mixers, PLL-based frequency synthesizers, voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs), power amplifiers (PAs), and microstrip filters
and patch antennas. The characteristics of passive microstrip components
(including interconnect). Emphasis is on a quantitative
reconciliation of theoretical predictions and extensive experimental
measurements performed with spectrum and network analyzers,
time-domain reflectometers (TDRs), noise figure meter and phase
noise analyzers. Prerequisites: EE 314, EE 344.
3 units, Win (Lee, T)
EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering
Neuroscience and electrical engineering, focusing on principles
and theory in modern neural prosthetic systems (brain-computer or
brain-machine interfaces). Electrical properties of neurons, information
encoding, neural measurement techniques and technology,
processing electronics, information decoding and estimators, and
statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: EE 214, EE 278.
3 units, not given this year
EE 453. Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation
Research on the radiation belts of Earth and other planets. Physical
processes which lead to magnetic trapping of electrons and ions.
Analytical tools for trapped radiation research. The nature of radiation
belts, source and loss mechanisms, and the relation of radiation
belts to other geophysical phenomena.
3 units, not given this year
EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS)
based on the use of radio frequency pulses to manipulate magnetization.
Analysis and design of major types of RF pulses in one and
multiple dimensions, analysis and design of sequences of RF
pulses for fast imaging, and use of RF pulses for the creation of
image contrast in MRI. Prerequisite: 369B.
3 units, not given this year
EE 476. Network Information Theory
Network information theory deals with the fundamental limits on
information flow in networks and the optimal coding schemes that
achieve these limits. It aims to extend Shannon's point-to-point
information theory and the Ford-Fulkerson max-flow min-cut theorem
to networks with multiple sources and destinations. The
course presents the basic results and tools in the field in a simple
and unified manner. Topics covered include: multiple access channels,
broadcast channels, interference channels, channels with
state, distributed source coding, multiple description coding, network
coding, relay channels, interactive communication, and noisy
network coding. Prerequisites: EE376A or equivalent.
3 units, Aut (El Gamal, A)
EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory
Universal schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel
coding and decoding, prediction, denoising, and filtering. Characterization
of performance limitations in the stochastic settting:
entropy rate, rate-distortion function, channel capacity, Bayes envelope
for prediction, denoising, and filtering. Lempel-Ziv lossless
compression, and Lempel-Ziv based schemes for lossy compression,
channel coding, prediction, and filtering. Discrete universal
denoising. Compression-based approach to denoising. The compound
decision problem. Prerequisites: 278, 376A,B.
3 units, Aut (Staff)
EE 801. TGR Project
0 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 802. TGR Dissertation
0 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)