






































Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 1

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Emeriti: (Professors) Clayton W. Bates, Ronald N. Bracewell,* Richard 

Bube, Von R. Eshleman,* Michael J. Flynn,* Gene F. Franklin,* Joseph 
W. Goodman, Robert A. Helliwell,* Martin E. Hellman, Thomas 
Kailath,* Gordon S. Kino, John G. Linvill, Albert Macovski,* Laurence 
A. Manning, Edward J. McCluskey,* Malcolm M. McWhorter, James 
D. Meindl, Richard H. Pantell,* Anthony E. Siegman, Leonard Tyler,* 
Alan T. Waterman, Robert L. White; (Associate Professor) Bruce B. 
Lusignan; (Professors, Research) Donald L. Carpenter,* Aldo da 
Rosa,* Antony Fraser-Smith,* C. Robert Helms, Ingolf Lindau, David 
Luckham, Calvin F. Quate

Chair: Bruce A. Wooley
Vice Chair: Simon Wong
Associate Chair (Admissions): R. Fabian Pease
Assistant Chair: Sharon A. Gerlach
Professors: Nicholas Bambos, Stephen P. Boyd, John M. Cioffi, Thomas 

M. Cover, Donald C. Cox, William J. Dally, Robert W. Dutton, Abbas 
El Gamal, Hector Garcia-Molina, Bernd Girod, Andrea G. Goldsmith, 
Robert M. Gray, Patrick Hanrahan, James S. Harris, Stephen E. Harris, 
John L. Hennessy, Lambertus Hesselink, Mark A. Horowitz, Roger T. 
Howe, Umran S. Inan, Joseph M. Kahn, Gregory T. A. Kovacs, Thomas 
H. Lee, Marc Levoy, Teresa H. Y. Meng, David A. B. Miller, Dwight G. 
Nishimura, Oyekunle Olukotun, Brad G. Osgood, R. Fabian W. Pease, 
James D. Plummer, Krishna Saraswat, Fouad A. Tobagi, Shan X. Wang, 
Jennifer Widom, Bernard Widrow, H. S. Philip Wong, S. Simon Wong, 
Bruce A. Wooley, Yoshihisa Yamamoto, Howard Zebker

Associate Professors: Dan Boneh, Dawson Engler, Shanhui Fan, John 
T. Gill III, Nick McKeown, John Pauly, Balaji Prabhakar, Mendel 
Rosenblum, Olav Solgaard, Sebastian Thrun, Benjamin Van Roy

Assistant Professors: Christoforos E. Kozyrakis, Philip Levis, Subhasish 
Mitra, Andrea Montanari, Boris Murmann, Peter Peumans, Krishna 
V. Shenoy, Jelena Vuckovic, Tsachy Weissman

Professors (Research): James F. Gibbons, Leonid Kazovsky, Butrus Khuri-
Yakub, Yoshio Nishi, Arogyaswami J. Paulraj, Piero Pianetta

Courtesy Professors: Stacey Bent, John Bravman, David Cheriton, Amir 
Dembo, David L. Dill, Per Enge, Gary Glover, Peter Glynn, Leonidas 
Guibas, Monica S. Lam, David G. Luenberger, John C. Mitchell, Sandy 
Napel, Richard Olshen, Norbert Pelc, Zhi-Xun Shen, Julius Smith, 
Brian Wandell, Yinyu Ye, Shoucheng Zhang

Courtesy Associate Professors: Kwabena Boahen, Michael McConnell, 
Daniel Spielman, Claire Tomlin

Courtesy Assistant Professors: Ramesh Johari, Sanjay Lall, Hari 
Manoharan, David Mazieres, Andrew Ng, Gunter Niemeyer, Amin 
Saberi

Lecturers: Dennis Allison, Michel Digonnet, Eileen Long, Dieter Scherer, 
Jason Stinson, Howard Swain

Consulting Professors: David Adler, Ahmad Bahai, Marina Bosi-
Goldberg, Nim K. Cheung, Richard Dasher, John Doolittle, Timothy 
Drabnik, Victor Eliashberg, Abbas Emami-Naeini, Leslie Field, Fred 
M. Gibbons, Michael Godfrey, Dimitry Gorinevsky, Timothy Groves, 
Homayoun Hashemi, Richard Hester, Bertrand Hochwald, Bob S. Hu, 
Theodore Kamins, John Koza, Rajeev Krishnamoorhy, David Leeson, 
Nadim Maluf, Roger Melen, Martin Morf, Madihally Narasimha, 
Debajyoti Pal, Yi-Ching Pao, Gurudatta Parulkar, Marcellinus 
Pelgrom, Bardia Pezeshki, Nirmal Saxena, Ronald Schafer, James 
Spilker, Jr., Simon Sze, Baylor Triplett, Martin Walt, Yao-Ting Wang, 
John Wenstrand, Jeffey Wilde

Consulting Associate Professors: Hamid Aghajan, John Apostolopoulos, 
David Burns, Ludwig Galambos, Nam Jeung Kim, Seongsin Kim, 
Philippe Lacroute, My. T. Le, Stuart Oberman, Stephen Richardson, 
David Su, Noel Thompson, Jun Ye, Bin Yu

Consulting Assistant Professors: Robert Candler, Edward Chan, Erik 
Chmelar, Maria del Mar Hershenson, Ronald Ho, Patrick Hung, Kapur 
Pawan, Seung Jean Kim, Tejas Krishnamohan, Ravi Narasimhan, 
Micah Siegel, Mehdi Soltan, Olaf Tornblad, Katelijn Vleugels, Eric 
Volkerink

Visiting Professors: Chern-Lin Chen, Robert Darling, Hyunsang Hwang, 
Jae-Hoon Kim, Yo-Sheng Lin, Wing Ching Luk, Jieh-Tsorng Wu

Visiting Associate Professors: David Elata, Yonina Eldar, Li Geng, Shin-
Ichi Kobayashi, Heon Lee, John Lockwood, Juan Romero-Jerez

Visiting Assistant Professors: Pierpaolo Baccichet, Baoyong Chi, Markus 
Flierl, Ofer Levi, Maneesh Sahani

*recalled to active duty

Mail Code: 94305-9505
Phone: (650) 723-3931; Fax: (650) 723-1882
Web Site: http://ee.stanford.edu/

Courses given in Electrical Engineering have the subject code EE. For 
a complete list of subject codes, see Appendix.

UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS
The mission of the undergraduate program of the Department of 

Electrical Engineering is to augment the liberal education expected of 
all Stanford undergraduates and impart a basic understanding of electri-
cal engineering built on a foundation of physical science, mathematics, 
computing, and technology.

Graduates of the undergraduate program are expected to possess 
knowledge of the fundamentals of electrical engineering and at least one 
specialty area. The graduates are expected to have the basic experimental, 
design, and communication skills to be prepared for continued study at the 
graduate level or for entry-level positions that require a basic knowledge 
of electrical engineering, science, and technology.

The educational objectives of the program are:
1. Technical knowledge: provide a basic knowledge of electrical engi-

neering principles along with the required supporting knowledge of 
computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science. The 
program must include depth in at least one specialty area, currently 
including computer hardware, computer software, controls, circuits, 
fields and waves, communication and signal processing, and semicon-
ductor and photonic devices.

2. Laboratory and design skills: develop the basic skills needed to perform 
and design experimental projects. Develop the ability to formulate 
problems and projects and to plan a process for solution, taking ad-
vantage of diverse technical knowledge and skills.

3. Communications skills: develop the ability to organize and present 
information and to write and speak effective English.

4. Preparation for further study: provide sufficient breadth and depth for 
successful subsequent graduate study, postgraduate study, or lifelong 
learning programs.

5. Preparation for the profession: provide an appreciation for the broad 
spectrum of issues arising in professional practice, including econom-
ics, ethics, leadership, professional organizations, safety, service, and 
teamwork.
To major in Electrical Engineering (EE), undergraduates should follow 

the depth sequence given in the discussion of undergraduate programs 
in the “School of Engineering” section of this bulletin. Students are re-
quired to have a program planning sheet approved by their adviser and the 
department prior to the end of the quarter following the quarter in which 
they declare their major and at least one year prior to graduation. Program 
sheets for the general EE requirements and for each of the EE specialty 
sequences may be found at http://ughb.stanford.edu. Majors must receive 
at least a 2.0 grade point average (GPA) in courses taken for the EE depth 
requirement; all classes must be taken for a letter grade.

For information about an EE minor, see the “School of Engineering” 
section of this bulletin.

A Stanford undergraduate may work simultaneously toward the B.S. 
and M.S. degrees. See “Dual and Coterminal Degree Programs” in the 
“School of Engineering”section of this bulletin.

For University coterminal degree program rules and University ap-
plication forms, see http://registrar.stanford.edu/shared/publications.
htm#Coterm.

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



2 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G
HONORS

The Department of Electrical Engineering offers a program leading to 
a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering with honors. This program 
offers a unique opportunity for qualified undergraduate majors to conduct 
independent study and research at an advanced level with a faculty mentor, 
graduate students, and fellow undergraduates.

Admission to the honors program is by application. Declared EE majors 
with a grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.5 in Electrical Engineering 
are eligible to submit an application. Applications must be submitted by 
Autumn quarter of the senior year, be signed by the thesis adviser and 
second reader (one must be a member of the EE Faculty), and include an 
honors proposal. Students need to declare honors on Axess.

In order to receive departmental honors, students admitted to the 
honors program must:
1. maintain a grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.5 in EE courses.
2. complete at least 10 units of EE 191 for a letter grade with their project 

adviser.
3. submit two final copies of the honors thesis approved by the adviser 

and second reader.
4. attend poster and oral presentation in the Electrical Engineering Honors 

Symposium held at the end of Spring Quarter or present in another 
suitable forum approved by the faculty adviser.

GRADUATE PROGRAMS
University regulations governing the M.S., Engineer, and Ph.D. 

degrees are described in the “Graduate Degrees” section of this bulletin.
The profession of electrical engineering demands a strong foundation 

in physical science and mathematics, a broad knowledge of engineering 
techniques, and an understanding of the relationship between technology 
and man. Curricula at Stanford are planned to offer the breadth of educa-
tion and depth of training necessary for leadership in the profession. To 
engage in this profession with competence, four years of undergraduate 
study and at least one year of postgraduate study are recommended. For 
those who plan to work in highly technical development or fundamental 
research, additional graduate study is desirable.

A one- to two-year program of graduate study in Electrical Engineer-
ing may lead to the degree of Master of Science. The program is typically 
completed in five academic quarters. A two- to three-year program, offer-
ing a wider selection of engineering course work, more opportunity for 
study in the related fields of engineering, mathematics, and physics, and 
in particular, more independent work and individual guidance, may lead 
to the degree of Engineer.

The degree of Doctor of Philosophy is offered under the general regu-
lations of the University. The doctoral program, requiring a minimum of 
135 units of graduate study, should be considered by those with the ability 
and desire to make a life work of research or teaching.

Application for Admission—Applications for admission with graduate 
standing in Electrical Engineering (EE) should be completed electronically 
at http://gradadmissions.stanford.edu. For more information concerning 
Electrical Engineering graduate admissions, see http://ee-admissions.
stanford.edu. The application deadline for admission for Autumn Quarter 
2008-09 is December 11, 2007.

MASTER OF SCIENCE
Students with undergraduate degrees in physics, mathematics, or re-

lated sciences, as well as in various branches of engineering, are invited 
to apply for admission. They should typically be able to complete the 
master’s degree in five academic quarters; note that many courses are not 
taught during the summer. Students with undergraduate degrees in other 
fields may also be admitted for graduate study; see below.

The master’s degree program may provide advanced preparation for 
professional practice or for teaching on the junior college level, or it may 
serve as the first step in graduate work leading to the degree of Engineer 
or Ph.D. The faculty does not prescribe specific courses to be taken. Each 
student, with the help of a program adviser, prepares an individual program 
and submits it to the faculty for approval. The master’s program proposal 
must be submitted to the department office during the first quarter of gradu-

ate study; modifications may be made until one quarter prior to degree 
conferral. Detailed requirements and instructions are in the Handbook 
for Graduate Students in Electrical Engineering at Stanford University 
(http://ee.stanford.edu/gradhandbook/). Programs of at least 45 quarter 
units that meet the following guidelines are normally approved. Cognate 
(extradepartmental) courses of the appropriate level are considered as 
Electrical Engineering courses.
1. A sequence of three or more letter-graded electrical engineering courses 

numbered above 200, to provide depth in one area. The student must 
maintain an average 3.0 grade point average (GPA) or better in both 
the depth area and overall.

2. At least one letter-graded EE course numbered above 200 in each of 
three distinct course areas outside of the area selected under item 1 to 
provide breadth.Two courses are not considered to be in distinct areas 
if they can be found under a common depth area.

3. Enough additional units of EE courses so that items 1 through 3 total at 
least 21 units of letter-graded EE courses numbered above 200, includ-
ing at least 9 units of such courses numbered in the 300s or 400s. Some 
600- or 700-level summer courses may also be considered for inclusion 
in the M.S. program. Special studies units may not be used.

4. Additional course work to bring the total to 45 or more quarter units, 
including:
a) at least 36 letter-graded units
b) at least 36 units at or above the 100 level
c) at least 30 units in technical areas such as engineering, mathematics, 
 and science; thesis and special studies units cannot be included.

5. Either (a) one formal EE seminar course for credit, or (b) attend a mini-
mum of eight informal or formal EE research seminars, and submit with 
the final M.S. program a list of the seminars with a paragraph describing 
the content and the signature of the M.S. adviser. This requirement is to 
ensure that students sample the many  available research seminars. 
Capable students without formal undergraduate preparation in electri-

cal engineering may also be admitted for graduate study. Such students 
may have graduated in any field and may hold either the B.S. or B.A. 
degree. Each student, with the help of an adviser, prepares a program of 
study to meet particular needs and submits it to the faculty for approval. 
A student with adequate preparation in mathematics through calculus and 
college physics including electricity can usually complete the M.S. degree 
requirements within two academic years. A student with some additional 
preparation in electrical engineering may be able to complete the M.S. 
requirements in onlyone academic year.

Graduate study in EE demands that students be adequately prepared in 
circuits, digital systems, fields, lab work, mathematics, and physics. Skill 
in using modern computing facilities is essential for electrical engineers, 
and an increasing number of courses routinely require it. Skill should be 
acquired early in the program, either by taking one of the regular computer 
science courses or one of the special short courses given by the Computa-
tion Center, or by self-study.

It is the student’s responsibility, in consultation with an adviser, to 
determine whether the prerequisites for advanced courses have been met. 
Prerequisite courses ordinarily taken by undergraduates may be included 
as part of the graduate program of study. However, if the number of these is 
large, the proposed program may contain more than the typical 45 units, and 
the time required to meet the degree requirements may be increased.

Students working toward the Master of Science degree in Electrical 
Engineering who are considering a Ph.D. or Engineer degree program 
in Electrical Engineering at Stanford must request the addition of a new 
degree program by submitting a Graduate Program Authorization Petition 
for approval by the department.  The petition must be submitted and ap-
proved at least one quarter prior to M.S. degree completion. Once the M.S. 
degree in EE has been conferred, a student may not register for additional 
course work without this approval. Permission to study beyond the M.S. 
degree is normally granted to students who were originally admitted to 
the Ph.D. program if the student:
1. has passed the Ph.D. qualifying examination within the past year, or
2. has a written commitment from a regular member of the EE faculty to 

serve as an Engineer or Ph.D. dissertation adviser, and has a satisfac-
tory academic record to date.



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 3

Students originally admitted only for the M.S. degree and not to the 
Ph.D. program may petition the EE graduate admissions committee during 
Autumn Quarter of their second year at Stanford for a change of status to 
the Ph.D. program with permission to take the Ph.D. qualifying exam in 
January. Requirements for the petition include a grade point average of 
3.5 on Stanford courses and a written statement of support from an EE 
faculty member with whom the student has conducted preliminary research 
through directed reading (EE 390 or 391) or as part of a 300-level project 
course. Decisions are based on performance and the strength of the sup-
port letter. If admitted to the Ph.D. program, permission to study beyond 
the M.S. degree is normally granted under the same conditions as those 
described above for students originally admitted to the Ph.D. program. 
Students not admitted to the Ph.D. program are normally granted permis-
sion to continue past the M.S. degree only if there is a written commitment 
from a regular member of the EE faculty to serve as an Engineer dissertation 
supervisor. The student should file for candidacy for the Engineer degree 
within one quarter of receiving the M.S.

ENGINEER
The degree of Engineer requires a minimum of 90 units of residency. 

Units completed at Stanford towards a master’s degree in an Engineering 
discipline may be used towards the 90-unit residency requirement for the 
Engineer degree. A student who received an M.S. degree elsewhere can 
transfer in 45 units towards the 90-unit requirement for an Engineer’s 
degree. A student would need to fill out the Application for Graduate 
Residency Credit form to be filed with the Degree Progress Office in the 
Registrar’s Office.

Work toward the degree of Engineer in Electrical Engineering normally 
includes the requirements for work toward the master’s degree in Electrical 
Engineering, including qualifications for admission.

An additional year allows time for a broader program, or a more 
concentrated program, or whatever arrangement may seem suitable to 
the candidate, the adviser, and the department. Advanced study at other 
universities, or in other departments at Stanford, may be allowed within 
the foregoing consideration. The equivalent of approximately one quarter 
is devoted to independent study and thesis work with faculty guidance. 
The thesis is often of the nature of a professional report on the solution of 
a design problem. The degree of Engineer differs from the Ph.D. in that it 
prepares for professional engineering work rather than theoretical research. 
The candidate may select courses that are suitable for either the degree of 
Engineer or the Ph.D. degree and decide later which program to pursue.

The best procedure for the applicant to follow is (1) if now work-
ing toward the Stanford M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering, request 
permission to continue graduate studies beyond the master’s degree, 
using the Graduate Program Authorization Petition form obtained from 
the Department of Electrical Engineering office, or (2) if not planning 
to receive the Stanford M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering, apply for 
admission to the Department of Electrical Engineering as a candidate for 
the degree of Engineer.

During the first quarter of work beyond the M.S. degree, formal ap-
plication for admission to candidacy for the degree of Engineer is made 
on a form that can be obtained from the department office. The program 
of study is prepared by the student with the help of the thesis adviser and 
submitted to the academic associate for approval. The form should contain 
a list of all graduate courses completed at Stanford and elsewhere and all 
courses yet to be completed. For the most recent information, see http://
ee.stanford.edu/gradhandbook/engineer.html.

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Admission to a graduate program does not imply that the student is 

a candidate for the Ph.D. degree. Advancement to candidacy requires 
superior academic achievement, satisfactory performance on a qualifying 
examination, and sponsorship by two faculty members. Enrollment in EE 
391, Special Studies, is recommended as a means for getting acquainted 
with a faculty member who might be willing to serve as a supervisor.

Students admitted to the Ph.D. program should submit an application to 
take the department qualifying examination (given each Winter Quarter). 
Upon completion of the qualifying examination and after securing agree-

ment by two faculty members to serve as dissertation advisers, the student 
should file an Application for Doctoral Candidacy. Students are expected 
to apply for candidacy prior to the end of their second year in the Ph.D. 
program. The Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering is a specialized degree, and is 
built on a broad base of physics, mathematics, and engineering skills. The 
course program is expected to reflect competency in Electrical Engineer-
ing and specialized study in other areas relevant to the student’s research 
focus. Normally the majority of units are drawn from EE department or 
cognate courses, with typically 9 units from related advanced physics, 
mathematics, engineering, or computer science courses, depending on the 
area of research. Only after receiving department approval to that applica-
tion does the student become a candidate for the Ph.D. degree.

Requirements may be summarized as follows. The student must com-
plete (1) a minimum of 135 units of residence with graduate standing at 
Stanford; (2) one or more qualifying examinations given by the faculty 
of the Department of Electrical Engineering; (3) an approved course of 
study in Electrical Engineering; (4) an approved program of research and 
a written dissertation, based on research, which must be a contribution to 
knowledge; (5) an oral examination that is a defense of dissertation research 
and is taken near the completion of the doctoral program.

PH.D. MINOR
For a minor in Electrical Engineering (EE), the student must fulfill the 

M.S. depth requirement, complete a total of at least 20 units of course work 
at the 200-plus level in electrical engineering (of which 15 units must be 
graded) and be approved by the department’s Ph.D. Degree Committee. A 
grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.35 on these courses is required.

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
The department awards a limited number of fellowships, teaching and 

course assistantships, and research assistantships to incoming graduate stu-
dents. Applying for such assistance is part of the admission application.

THE HONORS COOPERATIVE PROGRAM
Many of the department’s graduate students are supported by the 

Honors Cooperative Program (HCP), which makes it possible for aca-
demically qualified engineers and scientists in nearby companies to be 
part-time graduate students in Electrical Engineering while continuing 
nearly full-time professional employment. Prospective HCP students 
follow the same admission process and must meet the same admission 
requirements as full-time graduate students. For more information regard-
ing the Honors Cooperative Program, see the “School of Engineering” 
section of this bulletin.

AREAS OF RESEARCH
Candidates for advanced degrees participate in the research activities 

of the department as paid research assistants or as students of individual 
faculty members. At any one time, certain areas of research have more 
openings than others. A new applicant should express a second choice of 
research interest in the event that there are no vacancies in the primary area 
of interest. At present, faculty members and students are actively engaged 
in research in the areas listed below.

COMMUNICATIONS
Adaptive Modulation and Coding
Adaptive Multiuser Coding and Reception
Applied Optics and Optoelectronics
Cellular Radio Systems/Networks
Coding and Coded Modulation
Communication Channels and Signal Propagation
Communication and Information Theory
Digital Subscriber Lines
Digital Transmission
Frequency Reuse in Large Wireless Networks
Mobility in Wireless Networks
Multicarrier Modulation and OFDM
Multipath Mitigation Techniques
Multiple Access Techniques    

El
ec

tri
ca

l E
ng

in
ee

ri
ng



4 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

Multiple Antenna and MIMO Systems
Optical Communications
Optical Networks
Optoelectronic Components and Systems
Resource Allocation/Channel Assignment/Handoff in Wireless Networks
Wavelength Division Multiplexing
Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks
Wireless Communications
Wireless Local Area Networks
Wireless Personal Communication Systems

COMPUTER SYSTEMS
Asynchronous Circuits
Compilers
Computer-Aided Design
Computer Architecture
Computer Graphics
Computer Networks
Computer Organization
Computer Reliability
Concurrent Languages
Concurrent Processes and Processors
Database and Information Systems
Distributed Systems
Embedded System Design
Hardware/Software Co-Design
Hardware Verification
Human Computer Interaction
Multimedia Systems
Operating Systems
Performance Measurement and Modeling
Programming Languages
Program Verification
Robust Systems
VLSI Design

INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Adaptive Control and Signal Processing
Adaptive Neural Networks
Biomedical Signal Analysis
Computer-Aided Design and Analysis of Systems
Data Communications
Digital Signal Processing
Estimation Theory and Applications
Fourier and Statistical Optics
Information and Coding Theory
Medical Imaging and Image Processing
Multivariable Control
Optical Communications
Optimization-Based Design
Pattern Recognition and Complexity
Quantization and Data Compression
Real-Time Computer Applications
Signal Processing
Speech and Image Coding

INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
Analog Integrated Circuits
Biomedical Sensors, Circuits, and Signal Processing
Bipolar, MOS, and other Device and Circuit Technologies
CAD of Processes, Devices, and Equipment
Custom Integrated Circuits for Computers and Telecommunications
Digital Integrated Circuits
Integrated Sensors and Actuators
Mixed Signal Integrated Circuits
Nanostructures
Neural Recording and Signal Processing
Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits

Organic Materials, Devices and Circuits
Process, Device, Circuit, and Equipment Modeling
RF Circuits for Wireless Transmission
Robust Circuits
Sensors and Control for VLSI Manufacturing
VLSI Device Structures and Physics
VLSI Fabrication Technology
VLSI Materials, Interconnections, and Contacts
VLSI Packaging and Testing

LASERS AND QUANTUM ELECTRONICS
Coherent UV and X-Ray Sources
Free-Electron Lasers
Laser Applications in Aeronautics, Biology, Chemistry, Communications, 

Electronics, and Physics
Laser Devices and Laser Physics
Nonlinear Optical Devices and Materials
Optoelectronic Devices
Photoacoustic Phenomena
Semiconductor Diode Lasers
Ultrafast Optics and Electronics

MICROWAVES, ACOUSTICS, AND OPTICS
Acoustic Microscopy
Acousto-Optic Devices
Fiber Optics
Holography
Microwave Integrated Circuits and Devices
Nanophotonics
Nondestructive Testing
Optical Interferometry
Scanning Optical Microscopes

RADIOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING
Environmental Studies using Satellite Technology
Exploration of the Earth from Space
Interferometric and Holographic Imaging with Radio Waves
Numerical Methods for Science Data Analysis
Optical Remote Sensing
Planetary Exploration
Radar Interferometry
Radar Remote Sensing
Radio Occultation Studies
Radio Wave Scattering
Remote Sensing of Atmospheres and Surfaces
Signal and Image Processing Methods
Space Data Management
Spaceborne Radio Receiver Development
Synthetic Aperture Radar Satellites

SOLID STATE
Applied and Fundamental Superconductivity
Crystal Preparation: Epitaxy and Ion Implantation, and Molecular Beam 

Epitaxy
Defect Analysis in Semiconductors
Electron and Ion Beam Optics
Electron Spectroscopy
Experimental Determination of the Electronic Structure of Solids
High Resolution Lithography
Laser, Electron, and Ion Beam Processing and Analysis
Magnetic Information Storage
Magnetic Materials Fundamentals and Nanostructures
Nanostructure Fabrication and Applications
Nanophotonics
Molecular Beam Epitaxy
Novel Packaging Approaches for Electronic Systems
Optoelectronic Devices
Physics and Chemistry of Surfaces and Interfaces   

SC
H

O
O

L 
O

F 
EN

G
IN

EE
RI

N
G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 5

Semiconductor and Solid State Physics
Solid State Devices: Physics and Fabrication
Ultrasmall Electron and Photodevices

SPACE PHYSICS AND ELECTROMAGNETICS
Computational Electromagnetics
Detection of Electromagnetic Fields from Earthquakes
Electromagnetic Waves and Plasmas
Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation
Ionospheric and Magnetospheric Physics
Ionospheric Modification
Lightning Discharges
Lightning-Ionosphere Interactions
Space Engineering (also see the “Space Science and Astrophysics” sec-

tion of this bulletin)
Ultra-Low Frequency Fluctuations of the Earth’s Magnetic Field
Very Low Frequency Wave Propagation and Scattering

COURSES
WIM indicates that the course satisfies the Writing in the Major require-

ments. (AU) indicates that the course is subject to the University Activity 
Unit limitations (8 units maximum).

Electrical Engineering courses are typically numbered according to 
the year in which the courses are normally taken.
010-099 first or second year
100-199 second through fourth year
200-299 mezzanine courses for advanced undergraduates or gradu-

ates
300-399 first graduate year
400-499 second or third graduate year
600-799 special summer courses

The Department of Electrical Engineering (EE) offers courses in the 
following areas:

Communication Systems
Computer Hardware
Computer Software Systems
Control and System Engineering
Dynamic Systems and Optimization 
Electronic Circuits
Electronic Devices, Sensors, and Technology
Fields, Waves, and Radioscience
Image Systems
Lasers, Optoelectronics, and Quantum Electronics
Network Systems
Signal Processing
Solid State Materials and Devices
Cognate courses offered by other departments are listed following 

the EE courses.

UNDERGRADUATE
EE 15N. The Life of an Engineering Project—Stanford Introductory 
Seminar. Preference to freshmen. The process of taking an engineering 
product from idea to shipment. Focus is on the design of a large engi-
neering system. Student teams proposes ideas; architects turn the ideas 
into a functional specification; engineering managers determine needed 
resources and schedule; the engineering team works out design details; 
and verification engineers ensure that the designs operate correctly. 
GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Goldsmith, A; Le, M)

EE 17N. Engineering the Micro and Nano Worlds: From Chips to 
Genes—Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen. Hands-
on operation of microscopes and micro-fabrication tools in the Stanford 
Nanofabrication Facility, field trips to local companies engaged in the 
applications of micro/nanotechnologies, and guest speakers in microelec-
tronics, MEMS, and bio- and nanotechnology. Prerequisites: high-school 
physics. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Spr (Pease, R; Maluf, N)

EE 20N. Hacking Stuff—Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference 
to freshmen. The design of a complete system by combining electrical 
engineering disciplines such as control theory, circuit design, microproces-
sors, and semiconductor devices. Based on radio-controlled toy cars, the 
design and construction of a robot capable of autonomously following a 
track. Teams compete in a race against the clock in a version of the DARPA 
Grand Challenge. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Peumans, P)

EE 21N. What is Nanotechnology?—Stanford Introductory Seminar. 
Preference to freshmen. Possibilities and impossibilities of nanotechnol-
ogy. Sources include Feynman’s There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom, 
Drexler’s Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology, and 
Crichton’s Prey. Assumptions and predictions of these classic works; 
what nano machinery may do; scenarios of a technology that may go 
astray. Prerequisites: high school math, physics and chemistry. GER:DB-
EngrAppSci

3 units, Aut (Wong, P)

EE 22N. Medical Imaging Systems—Stanford Introductory Seminar. 
Preference to freshmen. The technology of major imaging modalities used 
for disease diagnosis: x-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance; their 
history, societal impact, and clinical applications. Field trips to a medical 
center and an imaging research lab. Term paper and presentation. Prerequi-
sites: high school physics and calculus. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Nishimura, D)

EE 41. Physics of Electrical Engineering—How everything from elec-
trostatics to quantum mechanics is used in common high-technology prod-
ucts. Electrostatics are critical in micro-mechanical systems used in many 
sensors and displays, and basic EM waves are essential in all high-speed 
communication systems. How to propagate energy in free space. Which 
aspects of modern physics are needed to generate light for the operation 
of a DVD player or TV. Introduction to semiconductors, solid-state light 
bulbs, and laser pointers. Hands-on labs to connect physics to everyday 
experience. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

5 units, Win (Staff)

EE 100. The Electrical Engineering Profession—Lectures/discussions 
on topics of importance to the electrical engineering professional. Continu-
ing education, professional societies, intellectual property and patents, 
ethics, entrepreneurial engineering, and engineering management.

1 unit, Aut (Gray, R)

EE 101A. Circuits I—First of two-course sequence. Introduction to cir-
cuit modeling and analysis. Topics include creating the models of typical 
components in electronic circuits and simplifying non-linear models for 
restricted ranges of operation (small signal model); and using network 
theory to solve linear and non-linear circuits under static and dynamic 
operations. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Win (Wong, S)

EE 101B. Circuits II—Second of two-course sequence. MOS large-
signal and small-signal models. MOS amplifier design including DC bias, 
small signal performance, multistage amplifiers, frequency response, and 
feedback. Prerequisite: 101A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Aut (Shenoy, K; Hershenson, M), Spr (Shenoy, K)

EE 102A. Signal Processing and Linear Systems I—Concepts and 
mathematical tools in continuous-time signal processing and linear 
systems analysis, illustrated with examples from signal processing, com-
munications, and control. Mathematical representation of signals and 
systems. Linearity and time-invariance. System impulse and step response. 
Frequency domain representations: Fourier series and Fourier transforms. 
Filtering and signal distortion. Time/frequency sampling and interpolation. 
Continuous-discrete time signal conversion and quantization. Stability and 
causality in linear systems. Laplace transforms and Bode plots. Feedback 
and control system design. Examples from filter design and linear control. 
Prerequisite: MATH 53 or ENGR 155A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Win (Pauly, J), Spr (Gray, R)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



6 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 102B. Signal Processing and Linear Systems II—Concepts and 
mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing and linear systems 
analysis with examples from digital signal processing, communications, 
and control. Discrete-time signal models. Continuous-discrete-continuous 
signal conversion. Discrete-time impulse and step response. Frequency 
domain representations: Fourier series and transforms. Connection be-
tween continuous and discrete time frequency representations. Discrete 
Fourier transform (DFT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT). Digital filter 
and signal processing examples. Discrete-time and hybrid linear systems. 
Stability and causality. Z transforms and their connection to Laplace 
transforms. Frequency response of discrete-time systems. Discrete-time 
control. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Spr (Kahn, J), Sum (Staff)

EE 106. Planetary Exploration—The other worlds of the solar system 
as revealed by their electromagnetic emissions and recent space missions. 
Comparative properties of the terrestrial and Jovian planets; planetary 
atmospheres, surfaces, interiors, and rings; planetary and satellite orbits 
and spacecraft trajectories; properties of interplanetary gas, dust, comets, 
and meteorites. Blackbody radiation and the basis for global warming. 
What the planets reveal about potential terrestrial catastrophes such as 
runaway greenhouse effect or collision with an asteroid or large comet. 
Origin and evolution of planetary systems. Remote sensing from spacecraft 
at radio, infrared, light, and ultraviolet wavelengths. Stanford EE depart-
ment radio experiments. Prerequisite: one year of college engineering. 
GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Spr (Fraser-Smith, A)

EE 108A. Digital Systems I—Digital circuit, logic, and system design. 
Digital representation of information. CMOS logic circuits. Combina-
tional logic design. Logic building blocks, idioms, and structured design. 
Sequential logic design and timing analysis. Clocks and synchronization. 
Finite state machines. Microcode control. Digital system design. Control 
and datapath partitioning. Lab. Prerequisite: ENGR 40. Corequisite for 
WIM: ENGR 102E. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3-4 units, Aut (Dally, W), Win (Levis, P)

EE 108B. Digital Systems II—The design of processor-based digital 
systems. Instruction sets, addressing modes, data types. Assembly lan-
guage programming, low-level data structures, introduction to operating 
systems and compilers. Processor microarchitecture, microprogram-
ming, pipelining. Memory systems and caches. Input/output, interrupts, 
buses and DMA. System design implementation alternatives, software/
hardware tradeoffs. Labs involve the design of processor subsystems 
and processor-based embedded systems. Prerequisite: 108A, CS 106B. 
GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3-4 units, Aut (Olukotun, O), Win (Kozyrakis, C)

EE 109. Digital Systems Design Lab—The design of integrated digital 
systems encompassing both customized software and hardware. Software/
hardware design tradeoffs. Algorithm design for pipelining and parallel-
ism. System latency and throughput tradeoffs. FPGA optimization tech-
niques. Integration with external systems and smart devices. Firmware 
configuration and embedded system considerations. Enrollment limited 
to 25; preference to graduating seniors. Prerequisites: 108B, and CS 106B 
or X. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Spr (Olukotun, O)

EE 113. Electronic Circuits—Bipolar and MOS amplifier design includ-
ing DC bias, small signal performance, multistage amplifiers, frequency 
response, feedback. Design and use of operational amplifiers. Prerequi-
sites: 102, 112. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, not given this year

EE 114X. Simulation-Based Circuit Design—Electronic circuit design 
based on analysis and circuit simulations. Concepts of design space, 
robust design and constraint-driven optimization. Hands-on, simulation 
lab-based experience that bridges electronics fundamentals and more 
advanced electronics design classes. Prerequisite: 101B.

2 units, Aut (Dutton, R)

EE 116. Semiconductor Device Physics—The fundamental operation 
of semiconductor devices and overview of applications. The physical 
principles of semiconductors, both silicon and compound materials; 
operating principles and device equations for junction devices (diodes, 
bipolar transistor, photo-detectors). Introduction to quantum effects 
and band theory of solids. Prerequisite: ENGR 40. Corequisite: 101B. 
GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Spr (Peumans, P)

EE 118. Introduction to Mechatronics—Technologies involved in 
mechatronics (intelligent electro-mechanical systems) and techniques to 
integrate these technologies into mechatronic systems. Topics: electronics 
(A/D, D/A converters, op-amps, filters, power devices); software program 
design (event-driven programming, state machine based design); DC and 
stepper motors; basic sensing; mechanical design (machine elements and 
mechanical CAD). Lab component of structured assignments combined 
with large, open-ended team project. Limited enrollment. Prerequisites: 
ENGR 40, and CS 106A or 106X (preferred).

4 units, not given this year

EE 122. Analog Circuits Laboratory—Practical applications of analog 
circuits, including simple amplifiers, filters, oscillators, power supplies, 
and sensors. Design skills, computer-aided design, and circuit fabrication 
and debugging. The design process through proposing, designing, simulat-
ing, building, debugging, and demonstrating a project. Radio frequency 
and largely digital projects not suitable for EE122. Prerequisite: ENGR 
40 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Aut, Spr (Kovacs, G)

EE 133. Analog Communications Design Laboratory—Design, testing, 
and applications. Amplitude modulation (AM) using multiplier circuits. 
Frequency modulation (FM) based on discrete oscillator and integrated 
modulator circuits such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-
lock loop (PLL) techniques, characterization of key parameters, and their 
applications. Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs involve 
building and characterization of AM and FM modulation/demodulation 
circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited to 30 undergraduates and 
coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: 101B. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Win (Dutton, R)

EE 134. Introduction to Photonics—Photonics, optical sensors, and 
fiber optics. Conceptual and mathematical tools for design and analysis of 
optical communication and sensor systems. Experimental characterization 
of semiconductor lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, 
fiber optic links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Class project aimed 
on confocal microscopy for biomedical applications. Laboratory experi-
ments. Prerequisite: 41 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Aut (Solgaard, O)

EE 136. Introduction to Nanophotonics and Nanostructures—
Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors. 
Confining these waves, and devices employing such confinement. Local-
ization of light and applications: metallic mirrors, photonic crystals, opti-
cal waveguides, microresonators, plasmonics. Localization of quantum 
mechanical waves: quantum wells, wires, and dots. Generation of light in 
semiconductors: spontaneous and stimulated emission, lasers, and light 
emitting diodes. Devices incorporating localization of both electromag-
netic and quantum mechanical waves such as resonant cavity quantum 
well lasers and microcavity-based single photon sources. System-level 
applications such as optical communications, biochemical sensing, and 
quantum cryptography. Prerequisite: familiarity with electromagnetic and 
quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors at the level of EE 41 or 
equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Aut (Vuckovic, J)

EE 138. Microscopes and Microscopy—Principles and operation of mi-
croscopes inclu…ding optical, scanning-electron, transmission-electron, 
atomic-force, and scanning-tunneling. Comparison of images taken of the 
same sample with different microscopes. Individual student-designed final 
projects. Prerequisite: PHYSICS 21 or AP Physics. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Aut (Pease, R)   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 7

EE 140. The Earth From Space: Introduction to Remote Sensing—
(Formerly GEOPHYS 140.) Global change science as viewed using 
space remote sensing technology. Global warming, ozone depletion, the 
hydrologic and carbon cycles, topographic mapping, and surface defor-
mation. Physical concepts in remote sensing. EM waves and geophysical 
information. Sensors studied: optical, near and thermal IR, active and 
passive microwave. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Zebker, H)

EE 141. Engineering Electromagnetics—Lumped versus distributed 
circuits. Transient response of transmission lines with resistive and reactive 
loads. Reflection, transmission, attenuation and dispersion. Steady-state 
waves on transmission lines. Standing wave ratio, impedance matching, 
and power flow. Coulomb’s law, electrostatic field, potential and gradi-
ent, electric flux and Gauss’s law and divergence. Metallic conductors, 
Poisson’s and Laplace’s equations, capacitance, dielectric materials. 
Electrostatic energy and forces. Steady electric currents, Ohm’s law, 
Kirchoff’s laws, charge conservation and the continuity equation, Joule’s 
law. Biot-Savart’s law and the static magnetic field. Ampere’s law and curl. 
Vector magnetic potential and magnetic dipole. Magnetic materials, forces 
and torques. Faraday’s law, magnetic energy, displacement current and 
Maxwell’s equations. Uniform plane waves. Prerequisites: 102A, MATH 
52.GER:DB-EngrAppSci

4 units, Aut (Inan, U)

EE 144. Wireless Electromagnetic Design Laboratory—Hands-on ex-
periments and projects with antennas, transmission lines and propagation 
for wireless communications and remote sensing. Using spectrum analy-
sers, swept frequency generators, frequency counters, couplers, detectors 
and slotted lines, develop measurement and design capability in the 1-20 
GHz range in support of chosen design projects. Two- to three-person team 
projects from antenna, guided wave distributed circuits, remote sensing, 
or related topics. Working model constructed and demonstrated; some 
funding available for project costs. Prizes for best projects. Lab. Enroll-
ment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 122 or 142.

3 units, not given this year

EE 168. Introduction to Digital Image Processing—Computer pro-
cessing of digital 2-D and 3-D data, combining theoretical material with 
implementation of computer algorithms. Topics: properties of digital 
images, design of display systems and algorithms, time and frequency 
representations, filters, image formation and enhancement, imaging sys-
tems, perspective, morphing, and animation applications. Instructional 
computer lab exercises implement practical algorithms. Final project 
consists of computer animations incorporating techniques learned in class. 
Prerequisite: Matlab programming. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3-4 units, not given this year

EE 178. Probabilistic Systems Analysis—Introduction to probability 
and statistics and their role in modeling and analyzing real world phenom-
ena. Events, sample space, and probability. Discrete random variables, 
probability mass functions, independence and conditional probability, 
expectation and conditional expectation. Continuous random variables, 
probability density functions, independence and expectation, derived 
densities. Transforms, moments, sums of independent random variables. 
Simple random processes. Limit theorems. Introduction to statistics: sig-
nificance, hypothesis testing, estimation and detection, Bayesian analysis. 
Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (El Gamal, A)

EE 179. Introduction to Communications—Communication system 
design and performance analysis. Topics include current communication 
systems (cellular, WLANs, radio and TV broadcasting, satellites, Internet), 
Fourier techniques, energy and power spectral density, random variables 
and random (noise) signals, filtering and modulation of noise, analog 
modulation (AM and FM) and its performance in noise, digital modulation 
(PSK and FSK), optimal receiver design, and probability of bit error for 
digital modulation. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Gray, R)

EE 190. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering—
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual or 
team activities involve lab experimentation, design of devices or systems, 
or directed reading.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

EE 191. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering—
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given for a 
letter grade only. If a letter grade given on the basis of required written 
report or examination is not appropriate, enroll in 190.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

COGNATE COURSES
Courses approved to fulfill EE program requirements at the level of 

100-199 EE courses are listed below. See respective department listings 
for course descriptions and  General Education Requirements (GER) 
information. For applicability to a degree program, see http://eebulletin.
stanford.edu/; click on the 2007-08 EE courses database link and select 
the Cognates layout.

APPPHYS 207. Laboratory Electronics
3 units, Win (Fox, J)

APPPHYS 208. Laboratory Electronics 
3 units, alternate years, not given this year

CS 107. Programming Paradigms
3-5 units, Aut, Spr (Cain, G)

CS 108. Object-Oriented Systems Design
3-4 units, Aut, Win (Parlante, N)

CS 148. Introductory Computer Graphics
3 units, Win (Hanrahan, P), Sum (Staff)

CS 194. Software Project
3 units, Spr (Plummer, R)

ENGR 105. Feedback Control Design
3 units, Win (Rock, S), Sum (Emami-Naeini, A)

UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE
EE 202. Medical Electronics—Open to all. Primarily biological introduc-
tion to physiological and anatomic aspects of medical instrumentation. 
Areas include patient monitoring, imaging, medical transducers, the 
unique aspects of medical electronic systems, the socio-economic impact 
of technology on medical care, and the constraints unique to medicine. Pre-
requisite: familiarity with circuit instrumentation techniques as in 101B.

3 units, Aut (Thompson, N)

EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer—Seminar. For prospective 
entrepreneurs with an engineering background. Contributions made to 
the business world by engineering graduates. Speakers include Stanford 
and other engineering and M.B.A. graduates who have founded large and 
small companies in nearby communities. Contributions from EE faculty 
and other departments including Law, Business, and MS&E.

1 unit, Win (Melen, R)

EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes—For students in-
terested in the physical bases and practical methods of silicon VLSI chip 
fabrication, or the impact of technology on device and circuit design, 
or intending to pursue doctoral research involving the use of Stanford’s 
Nanofabrication laboratory. Process simulators illustrate concepts and 
provide a virtual lab experience. Topics: principles of integrated circuit 
fabrication processes, physical and chemical models for crystal growth, 
oxidation, ion implantation, etching, deposition, lithography, and back-
end processing. Required for 410.

3 units, Aut (Plummer, J)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



8 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 214. Analog Integrated Circuit Design—Analysis and design of 
MOS analog integrated circuits, emphasizing quantitative measures of 
performance and circuit limitations. Evaluation of circuit performance 
by means of hand calculations and computer-aided circuit simulations. 
Design of operational transconductance amplifiers, biasing circuits, and 
voltage references. Feedback amplifier design. Prerequisite: 101B.

3 units, Aut (Murmann, B)

EE 215. Bipolar Analog Integrated Circuit Design—Bipolar analog 
circuits for high-frequency operation, including applications for network-
ing and communications, such as video and broadband RF amplifiers. 
Device operation and compact modeling in support of circuit simulations 
needed for design. Circuit building blocks, including current and voltage 
references, and cascaded multi-stage amplifiers. Analysis and design of 
feedback circuits. Small design projects and use of SPICE models repre-
sentative of state-of-the-art bipolar technology. Prerequisite: 101B.

3 units, Win (Dutton, R; Murmann, B)

EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices—Carrier 
generation, transport, recombination, and storage in semiconductors. 
Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction, heterojunction, metal 
semiconductor contact, bipolar junction transistor, MOS capacitor, MOS 
and junction field-effect transistors, and related optoelectronic devices 
such as CCDs, solar cells, LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models 
that reflect physical principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis 
and design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.

3 units, Aut (Harris, J), Win (Saraswat, K; Pease, R)

EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I—Emphasis is on applications 
in modern devices and systems. Topics include: Schrödinger’s equation, 
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, operator approach to quantum mechan-
ics, Dirac notation, solutions of simple problems including quantum wells 
and tunneling. Quantum harmonic oscillator, coherent states. Calculation 
techniques including matrix diagonalization, perturbation theory, and 
variational method. Time-dependent perturbation theory, applications 
to optical absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and Fermi’s golden 
rule. Quantum mechanics in crystalline materials. Prerequisites: MATH 
52 and 53, PHYSICS 65 (or PHYSICS 43 and 45).

3 units, Aut (Miller, D)

EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II—Continuation of 222, includ-
ing more advanced topics: angular momentum in quantum mechanics, 
spin, hydrogen atom, systems of identical particles (bosons and fermions), 
methods for one-dimensional problems, introductory quantum optics 
(electromagnetic field quantization, coherent states), fermion annihila-
tion and creation operators, interaction of different kinds of particles 
(spontaneous emission, optical absorption, and stimulated emission). 
Quantum information and interpretation of quantum mechanics. Other 
topics in electronics, optoelectronics, optics, and quantum information 
science. Prerequisite: 222.

3 units, Win (Miller, D)

EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics—Topics: energy band 
theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering, classical kinetic theory, 
statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and non-equilibrium semiconductor 
statistics. Prerequisite: course in modern physics.

3 units, Aut (Peumans, P)

EE 231. Introduction to Lasers—How lasers work, including quantum 
transitions in atoms, stimulated emission and amplification, rate equations, 
saturation, feedback, coherent optical oscillation, laser resonators, and 
optical beams. Limited primarily to steady-state behavior; classical models 
for atomic transitions with little quantum mechanics background required. 
Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory to the level of 142, preferably 241, 
and some atomic or modern physics such as PHYSICS 70 or 130, 131.

3 units, Win (Digonnet, M)

EE 232. Laser Dynamics—Continuation of 231, emphasizing dynamic 
and transient effects including spiking, Q-switching, mode locking, fre-
quency modulation, frequency and spatial mode competition, linear and 
nonlinear pulse propagation, short pulse expansion, and compression. 
Prerequisite: 231.

3 units, Spr (Fan, S)

EE 234. Photonics Laboratory—Photonics and fiber optics with a focus 
on communication and sensing. Experimental characterization of semicon-
ductor lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic 
links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Prerequisite: 142.

3 units, Spr (Hesselink, L)

EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices—Guided wave optics, optical 
waveguide devices, and integrated optics. Wave propagation in layered 
media, slab waveguides, and optical fibers. Rectangular waveguides. 
Optical waveguide technology. Coupled-mode theory. Numerical analysis 
of complex waveguides. Photonic crystals. Physics and design of wave-
guide devices. Fiber sensors, waveguide gratings, waveguide modulators, 
directional couplers, ring filters. Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory to 
the level of 142 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves—Continuation of 141. Maxwell’s 
equations. Plane waves in lossless and lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of 
electromagnetic power. Poynting’s theorem. Reflection and refraction 
of waves at planar boundaries. Snell’s law and total internal reflection. 
Reflection and refraction from lossy media. Guided waves. Parallel-plate 
and dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow wave-guides, cavity resonators, 
microstrip waveguides, optical fibers. Interaction of fields with matter and 
particles. Antennas and radiation of electromagnetic energy. Prerequisite: 
141 or PHYSICS 120. GER:DB-EngrAppSci

3 units, Win (Inan, U)

EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices—Semiconductor 
physics and optical processes in semiconductors. Operating principles 
and practical device features of semiconductor optoelectronic materials 
and heterostructures. Devices include: optical detectors (p-i-n, avalanche, 
and MSM); light emitting diodes; electroabsorptive modulators (Franz-
Keldysh and QCSE), electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-
Zehnder), switches (SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical cavity 
surface emitting). Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and solid state 
physics such as EE 216 and 228 or equivalents. Recommended: basic 
quantum mechanics and lasers such as EE 216 and 231 or equivalents.

3 units, Win (Harris, J)

EE 245. Wireless Electromagnetic Design Laboratory—Same content 
as 144 but with a higher level project.

3 units, not given this year

EE 246. Microwave Engineering—Microwave applications (terrestrial 
and satellite communications, radar, remote sensing, wireless communica-
tions) and their system and component requirements. Review of Maxwell’s 
equations. Propagation modes of transmission lines (TEM, waveguide, 
microstrip), S-parameter matrix modeling of discontinuities, junctions and 
circuits (impedance transformers, directional couplers, hybrids, filters, 
circulators, solid state amplifiers and oscillators). Microwave computer-
aided design examples. General flow of course is application to system 
to component; individual components are modeled by fields to modes to 
equivalent network. Prerequisite: 142.

3 units, alternate years, not given this year

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 9

EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications—Fibers: 
single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion, group-velocity 
dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear effects in fibers: 
Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase modulation, four-wave 
mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes, laser diodes, transverse and 
longitudinal mode control, modulation, chirp, linewidth, intensity noise. 
Modulators: electro-optic, electro-absorption. Photodiodes: p-i-n, ava-
lanche, responsivity, capacitance, transit time. Receivers: high-impedance, 
transimpedance, bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation formats: 
non-return-to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance: Q factor, bit-
error ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity degradations: extinction 
ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion. Wavelength-division multiplexing. 
System architectures: local-area, access, metropolitan-area, long-haul. 
Prerequisites: 102A or 261, and 242 or 235 or 241, and 178 or 179.

3 units, Aut (Kahn, J)

EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes—Mathematical methods, 
statistical and quantum mechanical models, and physical properties of 
noisy systems. Fundamentals of statistics, Fourrier analysis, statistical 
mechanics, quantum mechanics, and linear and nonlinear circuit theory. 
Noise propertiesof devices and systems such as simple conductor, me-
soscopic conductor, simple p-n junction, mesoscopic p-n junction, FET, 
laser amplifier/oscillator, parametric amplifier/oscillator, classical optical 
communication, and quantum communication.

3 units, Aut (Yamamoto, Y)

EE 249. Introduction to the Space Environment—The environment 
through which space probes and vehicles travel and orbit, and which 
moderates solar gases and radiation. Experimentation in this environ-
ment, tools used; regions into which it is divided including ionosphere, 
magnetosphere, heliosphere, and interplanetary space. The role of the Sun, 
the effects of changes in solar activity, charged particle motion which in 
combination with the Earth’s magnetic field leads to auroras and the Van 
Allen belts. Prerequisites: electromagnetics at the level of 242 and senior 
or graduate standing.

3 units, Aut (Fraser-Smith, A)

EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications—The Fourier 
transform as a tool for solving physical problems. Fourier series, the Fou-
rier transform of continuous and discrete signals and its properties. The 
Dirac delta, distributions, and generalized transforms. Convolutions and 
correlations and applications; probability distributions, sampling theory, 
filters, and analysis of linear systems. The discrete Fourier transform 
and the FFT algorithm. Multidimensional Fourier transform and use in 
imaging. Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis is on 
relating the theoretical principles to solving practical engineering and 
science problems. Prerequisites: Fourier series at the level of 102A, and 
linear algebra.

3 units, Aut (Osgood, B), Win (Gill III, J), Sum (Staff)

EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging—Time and frequency represen-
tations, two-dimensional auto- and cross-correlation, Fourier spectra, 
diffraction and antennas, coordinate systems and the Hankel and Abel 
transforms, line integrals, impulses and sampling, restoration in the pres-
ence of noise, reconstruction and tomography, imaging radar. Tomographic 
reconstruction using projection-slice and layergarm methods. Students 
create software to form images using these techniques with actual data. 
Final project consists of design and simulation of an advanced imaging 
system. Prerequisite: 261. Recommended: 278, 279.

3 units, Win (Zebker, H)

EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems—Applied linear 
algebra and linear dynamical systems with application to circuits, signal 
processing, communications, and control systems. Topics: least-squares 
approximations of over-determined equations and least-norm solutions of 
underdetermined equations. Symmetric matrices, matrix norm, and sin-
gular value decomposition. Eigenvalues, left and right eigenvectors, with 

dynamical interpretation. Matrix exponential, stability, and asymptotic 
behavior. Multi-input/multi-output systems, impulse and step matrices; 
convolution and transfer matrix descriptions. Control, reachability, and 
state transfer; observability and least-squares state estimation. Prerequi-
sites: linear algebra and matrices as in MATH 103; differential equations 
and Laplace transforms as in EE 102A.

3 units, Aut (Boyd, S), Spr (Lall, S)

EE 264. Digital Signal Processing—Two sided Z-transform. Linear time 
in variant discrete time systems. Sampling theory, A/D and D/A conver-
sion. Analog and digital filter design. Quantization of signals and filter 
coefficients. Signal scaling. DFS, DFT, and sampling in the frequency 
domain. Interpolation and decimation. Oversampling techniques for 
ADC and DAC. Digital signal processing for wireless communications. 
Prerequisite: 102B. Recommended: 261, 278.

3 units, Aut (Meng, T), Sum (Staff)

EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory—Applying 102A,B to 
real-world signal processing applications. Lab exercises use a program-
mable DSP to implement signal processing tasks. Topics: A/D conversion 
and quantization, sampling theorem, Z-transform, discrete-time Fourier 
transform, IIR filters, FIR filters, filter design and implementation, spectral 
analysis, rate conversion, wireless data communication, OFDM receiver 
design. Prerequisites: 102A,B. Recommended: 261.

3-4 units, Win (Meng, T)

EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics—Geometrical optics: ray 
matrices, Gaussian beams, optical instruments, and radiometry. Wave 
nature of light: Maxwell’s equations, propagation through media with 
varying index of refraction (e.g., fibers). Interferometry: basic principles, 
practical systems, and applications.

3 units, Aut (Byer, R)

EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems—Large-scale MOS design. 
Topics: MOS transistors, static and dynamic MOS gates, MOS circuit 
fabrication, design rules, resistance and capacitance extraction, power 
and delay estimation, scaling, MOS combinational and sequential logic 
design, registers and clocking schemes, memory, data-path, and control-
unit design. Elements of computer-aided circuit analysis, synthesis, and 
layout techniques. Prerequisites: 101A and 108B; familiarity with transis-
tors, logic design, Verilog, and digital system organization.

3 units, Aut (Mitra, S)

EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering—Electrical issues in the design of 
high-performance digital systems, including signaling, timing, synchro-
nization, noise, and power distribution. High-speed signaling methods; 
noise in digital systems, its effect on signaling, and methods for noise 
reduction; timing conventions; timing noise (skew and jitter), its effect 
on systems, and methods for mitigating timing noise; synchronization is-
sues and synchronizer design; clock and power distribution problems and 
techniques; impact of electrical issues on system architecture and design. 
Prerequisites: 102B and 108A, or equivalents. Recommended: 214.

3 units, not given this year

EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications—
Frequency reuse, cellular concepts, cochannel interference, handoff. 
Radio propagation in and around buildings: Friis equation, multipath, 
narrow-band and wide-band channels, small scale and large-scale sta-
tistics, space and time signal variation. Diversity. Receiver sensitivity, 
sources of noise, range. Performance statistics: coverage, margin, digital 
modulation, adjacent channel interference, and digital error rates. Wide 
band channels: maximum transmission rates. Multi-server queuing and 
traffic: Erlang formulas. Multiple access, FDMA, TDMA, CDMA; 
duplexing, FDD and TDD; multipath mitigation, OFDM, equalization, 
spread spectrum. Prerequisites: 242 and 278 or equivalent. Corequisite: 
279 or equivalent.

3 units, Spr (Cox, D)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



10 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 278. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing—Random 
variables, vectors, and processes; convergence and limit theorems; IID, 
independent increment, Markov, and Gaussian random processes; station-
ary random processes; autocorrelation and power spectral density; mean 
square error estimation, detection, and linear estimation. Prerequisites: 
178 or STATS 116, and linear systems and Fourier transforms at the level 
of 102A,B or 261.

3 units, Aut (El Gamal, A), Spr (Gill III, J), Sum (Staff)

EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems—Analysis and 
design of communication systems; analog and digital modulation and 
demodulation, frequency conversion, multiplexing, noise and distortion; 
spectral and signal-to-noise ratio analysis, probability of error in digital 
systems, spread spectrum. Prerequisites: 179 or 261, and 178 or 278.

3 units, Win (Hashemi, H)

EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture—Advanced system-level 
architecture techniques for devices such as personal computers, servers, 
and embedded or portable systems. Topics such as cache hierarchies, 
memory systems, storage and IO systems, virtualization, clusters, fault-
tolerance, and low-power design. Interactions between hardware and 
software layers in such systems. Performance analysis and optimization 
techniques for small- and large-scale systems. Principles such as locality, 
coarse-grain parallelism, overlapping communication and computation, 
performance/power trade-offs, and reliability. Prerequisite: 108B. Rec-
ommended: CS 140.

3 units, Aut (Kozyrakis, C)

EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks—Structure and compo-
nents of computer networks; functions and services; packet switching; 
layered architectures; OSI reference model; physical layer; data link 
layer; error control; window flow control; media access control protocols 
used in local area networks (Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI) and satellite 
networks; network layer (datagram service, virtual circuit service, rout-
ing, congestion control, Internet Protocol); transport layer (UDP, TCP); 
application layer.

3 units, Aut (Tobagi, F)

EE 290A,B,C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engi-
neers—For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program 
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy for 
Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy for 
Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering.

1 unit, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Wong, S)

EE 292C. Embedded Systems Engineering—From problem state-
ment to final design and fabrication at the system level. Topics include: 
microprocessor and microcontroller architecture review, communication 
protocols (I2C, SPI, EIA/TIA232,422,485, CAN, OneWire), peripheral 
devices (timers, ADCs, DACs, human-computer interface), solid state 
storage (CF, MMC), OrCAD design tools, hardware-software interactions 
and design considerations, and real time operating systems (RTOS). Final 
design project from concept to PCB layout and firmware development.

3 units, not given this year

EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains—Finite-state and 
countable-state Markov chains. Controlled Markov chains and dynamic 
programming algorithms. Application to modeling and analysis of engi-
neering systems. Prerequisites: 263, 278.

3 units, Spr (Van Roy, B)

EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes—For seniors and gradu-
ate students. Thermodynamics, heat engines, thermoelectics, biomass. 
Recommended: MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45

3 units, Aut (da Rosa, A)

EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes—For seniors and gradu-
ate students. Fuel cells. Production of hydrogen: electrolytic, chemical, 
thermolytic, photolytic. Hydrogen storage: hydrides. Photoelectric con-
verters; photo-thermovoltaic converters. Wind turbines. Recommended: 
EE 293A; MATH 41; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45

3 units, Win (da Rosa, A; Parker, M)

COGNATE COURSES
Courses approved to fulfill EE program requirements at the level of 

200-299 EE courses are listed below. See respective department listings 
for course descriptions. For applicability to a degree program, see http://
eebulletin.stanford.edu/; click on the 2007-08 EE courses database link 
and select the Cognates layout.

AA 272C. Global Positioning Systems
3 units, Win (Enge, P)

AA 278. Optimal Control and Hybrid Systems
3 units, not given this year

APPPHYS 226. Physics of Quantum Information 
3 units, alternate years, not given this year

APPPHYS 227. Applications of Quantum Information 
3 units, alternate years, not given this year

APPPHYS 272,273. Solid State Physics I,II
3 units, 272: Win, 273: Spr (Kivelson, S)

CS 140. Operating Systems and Systems Programming
3-4 units, Aut (Mazieres, D), Win (Rosenblum, M)

CS 143. Compilers
3-4 units, Aut (Cain, G), Sum (Staff)

CS 205A. Mathematical Methods for Robotics, Vision, and Graphics
3 units, Aut (Fedkiw, R)

CS 221. Artificial Intelligence: Principles and Techniques
3-4 units, Aut (Ng, A)

CS 223B. Introduction to Computer Vision
3 units, Win (Kosecka, J)

CS 240. Advanced Topics in Operating Systems
3 units, Win (Mazieres, D), Spr (Engler, D)

CS 242. Programming Languages
3 units, Aut (Mitchell, J)

CS 244A. Introduction to Computer Networks
3-4 units, Win (McKeown, N)

CS 248. Introduction to Computer Graphics
3-5 units, Aut (Staff)

CS 255. Introduction to Cryptography
3 units, Win (Boneh, D)

ENGR 205. Introduction to Control Design Techniques
3 units, Aut (Rock, S)

ENGR 206. Control System Design
4 units, Spr (Niemeyer, G)

ENGR 240. Introduction to Micro and Nano Electromechanical 
Systems (M/NEMS)

3 units, Aut (Pruitt, B)

MATSCI 199/209. Electronic and Optical Properties of Solids
3 units, Spr (Brongersma, M)

MATSCI 323. Thin Film and Interface Microanalysis
3 units, not given this year (Brongersma, M)

MATSCI 347. Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Nano-
structures

3 units, Spr (Wang, S; White, R)

ME 358. Heat Transfer in Microdevices
3 units, Spr (Goodson, K)

MS&E 237. Progress in Worldwide Telecommunications
3 units, Sum (Ivanek, F; Chiu, S)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 11

MS&E 246. Game Theory with Engineering Applications
3 units, Win (Erhun Oguz, F)

MS&E 251. Stochastic Decision Models
3 units, Win (Veinott, A)

GRADUATE
EE 300. Master’s Thesis and Thesis Research—Independent work 
under the direction of a department faculty. Written thesis required for 
final letter grade. The continuing grade ‘N’ is given in quarters prior to 
thesis submission. See 390 if a letter grade is not appropriate.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology—Memory 
devices: SRAM, DRAM, NVRAM (non-volatile memory). Functional-
ity and performance of ULSI systems. Semiconductor memories, device 
design considerations, device scaling, device fabrication, addressing, and 
readout circuits. Cell structures (1T-1C, 6T, 4T, 1T-1R, 0T-1R, floating 
gate FLASH, SONOS, NROM), and memory organization (open bit-line, 
folded bit-line, NAND, NOR, cross-point). New memory concepts such 
as nanocrystal memory, single-electron memory, magnetic tunnel junction 
memory (MRAM), ferroelectric memory (FRAM), phase change memory 
(PRAM), T-RAM, polymer memory, metal oxide memory, nanoconduc-
tive bridge memory). Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.

3 units, Aut (Wong, P)

EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar—State-
of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, advanced materi-
als, and nanoscience for device applications. Prerequisites: 216, 316.

1 unit, Win (Nishi, Y; Wong, P; Saraswat, K)

EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes—
Practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of the technology of 
modern MOS devices. Modern device and circuit fabrication and likely 
future changes. Advanced techniques and models of device and back-end 
(interconnect and contact) processing. Use of TSUPREM4 and MEDICI 
for process and device modeling. MOS process integration. Prerequisites: 
212, 216.

3 units, Spr (Saraswat, K)

EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators—Solid-state sensors 
and actuators, focusing on the use of integrated circuit fabrication tech-
nology for their realization. Categories of sensors and actuators include 
biological, chemical, mechanical, optical, and thermal. Mechanisms 
of transduction, fabrication techniques, and relative merits of different 
technologies. Micromachining techniques for monolithic integration of 
active circuits with sensors or actuators. Directions for future research. 
Prerequisite: 212 or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Kovacs, G)

EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits—Analysis and design of 
digital MOS integrated circuits. Development of different models for 
MOS transistors and how to use them to analyze circuit performance. Use 
of computer-aided circuit analysis. Logic styles include static, dynamic 
and pass logic, pulse-mode gates, and current-mode logic. Topics include 
sizing for min delay, noise and noise margins, power dissipation. The class 
uses memory design (SRAM) as a motivating example. DRAM and EE-
PROM design issues. Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended: 271.

3 units, Win (Horowitz, M)

EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design—Design of RF integrated circuits 
for communications systems, primarily in CMOS. Topics: the design of 
matching networks and low-noise amplifiers at RF, passive and active 
filters, mixers, modulators, and demodulators; review of classical control 
concepts necessary for oscillator design including PLLs and PLL-based 
frequency synthesizers. Design of low phase noise oscillators. Design of 
high-efficiency (e.g., class E, F) RF power amplifiers, coupling networks. 
Behavior and modeling of passive and active components at RF. Narrow-
band and broadband amplifiers; noise and distortion measures and mitiga-
tion methods. Overview of transceiver architectures. Prerequisite: 214.

3 units, Win (Lee, T)

EE 315. VLSI Data Conversion Circuits—Design of mixed-signal inte-
grated circuits for implementing the interfaces between analog and digital 
signals in CMOS VLSI systems. Fundamental circuit elements such as 
sample-and-hold circuits, comparators, analog gain blocks and integrators. 
The design of the constituent circuits for Nyquist-rate and oversampling 
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, sampled-data and 
continuous-time analog filters, and digital decimation and interpolation 
filters. Prerequisite: 214.

3 units, Spr (Murmann, B)

EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices—In modern VLSI technologies, device 
electrical characteristics are sensitive to structural details and therefore 
to fabrication techniques. How are advanced VLSI devices designed 
and what future changes are likely? What are the implications for device 
electrical performance caused by fabrication techniques? Physical mod-
els for nanometer scale structures, control of electrical characteristics 
(threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic transport) in small 
structures, and alternative device structures for VLSI. Prerequisites: 212 
and 216, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Wong, P)

EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits—The fundamentals of 
generating submicron patterns in integrated circuit manufacturing. Tech-
nologies include the formation of submicron images of ultraviolet light, 
the resulting exposure of polymeric resists, the subsequent development 
of resist patterns and their transfer into functional circuit material patterns 
through plasma etching and other techniques. Use of phase-shifting masks 
and other wavefront-engineering approaches. Hands-on computer simula-
tions. Prerequisites: 141 or equivalent, 212 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology—Recent 
advances in materials science, device physics and structures, and pro-
cessing technology, to extend VLS1 device scaling towards atomistic 
and quantum-mechanical physics boundaries. Topics include: mobility-
enhancement techniques; nanomaterial structures including tube, wire, 
beam, and crystal; conducting polymer; 3D FET; gate-wraparound FET; 
nonvolatile memory phenomena and devices; self-assembly; flash anneal-
ing; plasma doping; and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.

3 units, Win (Nishi, Y; Sze, S)

EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics—Physics of charge and 
energy transfer in molecular systems and connection with traditional me-
soscopic transport theories. Analysis of molecular organic light-emitting 
diodes, photovoltaic cells and transistors. Technology and applications of 
molecular semiconductors. Prerequisite: 228 or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials—Modern semicon-
ductor devices and integrated circuits are based on unique energy band, 
carrier transport, and optical properties of semiconductor materials. How to 
choose these properties for operation of semiconductor devices. Emphasis 
is on quantum mechanical foundations of the properties of solids, energy 
bandgap engineering, semiclassical transport theory, semiconductor 
statistics, carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport effects, high field 
ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation, quantum mechanical 
transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and non-radiative recombina-
tion. Prerequisites: 216, 228.

3 units, not given this year

EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices—Principles 
governing the operation of modern semiconductor devices. Assumptions 
and approximations commonly made in analyzing devices. Emphasis is on 
the application of semiconductor physics to the development of advanced 
semiconductor devices such as heterojunctions, HJ-bipolar transistors, 
HJ-FETs, nanostructures, tunneling, single electron transistor and photonic 
devices. Use of Sentaurus, a 2-D Poisson solver, for simulation of ultra-
small devices. Examples related to state-of-the-art devices and current 
device research. Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.

3 units, Spr (Harris, J)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



12 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces—Physical 
concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques probing the elec-
tronic structure of surfaces and interfaces. Microscopic and atomic models 
of microstructures; applications such as within semiconductor device tech-
nology and catalysis. Physical processes of low energy electron diffraction, 
Auger electron spectroscopy, UV and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, 
electron/photon stimulated ion desorption, inelastic tunneling spectros-
copy, ion scattering, surface EXAFS, and energy loss spectroscopy; and 
experimental aspects of these surface science techniques. Prerequisites: 
PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of instructor.

3 units, not given this year

EE 335. Introduction to Information Storage Systems—State-of-the-
art data storage technologies, including magnetic disk drive storage, opti-
cal data storage (CD-ROM, DVD, magneto-optic recording), solid state 
memory (flash memory, ferro-electric memory), and emerging technolo-
gies (magnetic random access memory, probe-based storage). Magnetic 
disk recording and comparisons among data storage technologies. Related 
nanotechnologies. Final presentation. Prerequisites: electromagnetism, 
optics, transistors, binary algebra, probability, and Fourier transform.

3 units, Win (Wang, S)

EE 336. Nanophotonics—(Same as MATSCI 346.) Recent develop-
ments in micro- and nanophotonic materials and devices. Basic concepts 
of photonic crystals. Integrated photonic circuits. Photonic crystal fibers. 
Superprism effects. Optical properties of metallic nanostructures. Sub-
wavelength phenomena and plasmonic excitations. Meta-materials. 
Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.

3 units, Win (Fan, S; Brongersma, M)

EE 340. Advanced Topics in Optics and Quantum Optics—Optical 
microcavities and their device applications. Types of optical microcavi-
ties (microdisks, microspheres, and photonic crystal cavities), and their 
electromagnetic properties, design, and fabrication techniques. Cavity 
quantum electrodynamics: strong and weak-coupling regime, Purcell fac-
tor, spontaneous emission control. Applications of optical microcavities, 
including low-threshold lasers, resonant cavity light-emitting diodes, and 
single-photon sources. Prerequisites: advanced undergraduate or basic 
graduate-level knowledge of electromagnetics, quantum mechanics, and 
physics of semiconductors.

3 units, Spr (Vuckovic, J)

EE 343. Advanced Optoelectronic Devices—Semiconductor quan-
tum well structures; superlattices and coupled quantum wells; optical 
properties of quantum wells; valence band structure; effects of strain; 
quantum well lasers; intersubband detectors; excitons in quantum wells; 
absorption saturation; electroabsorption; quantum well modulators and 
switches. Prerequisites: 222 or equivalent quantum mechanics, 243. 
Recommended: 223.

3 units, Spr (Miller, D)

EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory—Lecture/lab emphasizing lab. 
Techniques in the 1MHz-1GHz range useful in designing and measuring 
oscillators, amplifiers, and mixers. High frequency measurement tech-
niques including s-parameter measurements, amplifier noise figure, and 
oscillator phase noise. Guest speakers from Lucent and Hewlett-Packard. 
Enrollment limited to 25. Prerequisites: transmission lines, Smith charts. 
Recommended: 314.

3 units, Aut (Cox, D)

EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics—Wave propagation in aniso-
tropic, nonlinear, and time-varying media. Microscopic and macroscopic 
description of electric dipole susceptibilities. Free and forced waves-
phasematching; slowly varying envelope approximation-dispersion, dif-
fraction, space-time analogy; harmonic generation; frequency conversion; 
parametric amplification and oscillation; electro-optic light modulation; 
nonlinear processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites: 141, 242.

3 units, Spr (Harris, S)

EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science—Design and under-
standing of modern optical systems. Topics: geometrical optics; aberration 
theory; systems layout; applications such as microscopes, telescopes, 
optical processors. Computer ray tracing program as a design tool. Pre-
requisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Hesselink, L)

EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications—Optical ampli-
fiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor amplifiers. Erbium-doped 
fiber amplifiers. System applications: preamplified receiver performance, 
amplifier chains. Raman amplifiers, lumped vs. distributed amplification. 
Group-velocity dispersion management: dispersion-compensating fibers, 
filters, gratings. Interaction of dispersion and nonlinearity, dispersion 
maps. Multichannel systems. Wavelength-division multiplexing com-
ponents: filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk. Time-, subcar-
rier-, code- and polarization-division multiplexing. Solitons, loss- and 
dispersion-managed solitons. Comparison of modulation techniques: 
duobinary, pulse-amplitude modulation, differential phase-shift keying, 
phase-shift keying, quadrature-amplitude modulation. Comparison of 
detection techniques: noncoherent, differentially coherent, coherent. 
Spectral efficiency limits. Error-control coding. Prerequisite: 247.

3 units, Win (Kahn, J)

EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics—Coupled wave analysis of 
periodic structures, gratings structures for optical communcations, wave-
matter interactions with periodic media and photonic crystals, applications 
of periodic structures. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.

3 units, not given this year

EE 350. STARLab Seminar—Research topics from space physics, 
planetary exploration, ionospheric and magnetospheric physics, radar and 
remote sensing of the environment, applied electromagnetics, waves in 
optical fibers, and information systems with space applications. Applied 
research areas include wireless personal communications, high bandwidth 
wired and wireless transmission, optical communication systems, sensor 
networks, and related underlying and advancing technologies.

1 unit, Win (Inan, U)

EE 353. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer 
Scientists—For graduate students with little or no business experience. 
Leading computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and their best 
practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions these companies 
face. Corporate strategy, new product development, marketing, sales, 
distribution, customer service, financial accounting, outsourcing, and 
human behavior in business organizations. Case studies. Prerequisite: 
graduate standing.

3 units, Spr (Gibbons, F; Siegel, M)

EE 354. Introduction to Radio Wave Scattering—Integral and dif-
ferential equations of radio wave scattering; exact, approximate, and 
numerical solutions of single particle scattering for spheres, edges, points, 
and cylinders. Scattering from rough surfaces with large and small rough-
ness scales, as time permits. Multiple scattering; formulation and solu-
tion techniques for equation of transfer in discrete media and scattering 
by continuous media in weak and strong regimes. Applications to radar, 
radar astronomy, remote sensing, and biological media. Prerequisites: 
electromagnetic theory through standard graduate engineering topics; 
partial differential equations, boundary value problems in rectangular 
and spherical coordinates; and consent of instructor.

3 units, not given this year

EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications—Radar remote sensing, radar 
image characteristics, viewing geometry, range coding, synthetic aperture 
processing, correlation, range migration, range/Doppler algorithms, wave 
domain algorithms, polar algorithm, polarimetric processing, interfero-
metric measurements. Applications: polarimetry and target discrimination, 
topographic mapping surface displacements, velocities of ice fields.

3 units, alternate years, not given this year

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 13

EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and Applications—
Plasmas in nature and industry. Single particle motions. Plasma kinetic 
theory. Boltzmann equation and its moments. Cold and warm plasma 
models. Plasma as a fluid. Magnetohydrodynamics. Plasma conductivity 
and diffusion. Langmuir oscillations. Debye shielding. Plasma sheath. 
Waves in cold, magnetized, warm, and hot plasmas. Electron and ion 
waves. MHD waves. Landau damping. Nonlinear effects. Applications 
in industry and space science. Prerequisite: 242 or PHYSICS 122.

3 units, Spr (Inan, U)

EE 359. Wireless Communication—Design, performance analysis, and 
performance limits of wireless systems. Topics include: current wireless 
systems, path loss and shadowing, statistical multipath channel models, 
capacity of wireless channels, digital modulation and its performance in 
fading and intersymbol interference, adaptive modulation, diversity, mul-
tiple antenna systems (MIMO), equalization, multicarrier modulation, and 
spread spectrum and RAKE receivers. Possible additional topics: multiuser 
system design issues such as multiple access, frequency reuse in cellular 
systems, and ad hoc wireless network design. Prerequisite: 279.

3-4 units, Win (Goldsmith, A)

EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks—Design, analysis, 
and fundamental limits. Possible topics include multiuser detection and 
interference cancellation, multiple access, cellular system design and op-
timization, Shannon capacity and achievable rate regions of wireless mul-
tiuser channels and networks, ad hoc wireless network design, sensor and 
energy-constrained networks, and cross-layer design. Prerequisite: 359.

3 units, not given this year

EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems—Continuation of 263. Optimal 
control and dynamic programming; linear quadratic regulator. Lyapunov 
theory and methods. Linear estimation and the Kalman filter. Perron-
Frobenius theory. Examples and applications from digital filters, circuits, 
signal processing, and control systems. Prerequisites: 263 or equivalent; 
basic probability.

3 units, not given this year

EE 364A. Convex Optimization I—Convex sets, functions, and opti-
mization problems. The basics of convex analysis and theory of convex 
programming: optimality conditions, duality theory, theorems of alter-
native, and applications. Least-squares, linear and quadratic programs, 
semidefinite programming, and geometric programming. Numerical 
algorithms for smooth and equality constrained problems; interior-point 
methods for inequality constrained problems. Applications to signal 
processing, communications, control, analog and digital circuit design, 
computational geometry, statistics, machine learning, and mechanical 
engineering. Prerequisite: linear algebra such as 263.

3 units, Win (Boyd, S)

EE 364B. Convex Optimization II—Continuation of 364. Subgradient, 
cutting-plane, and ellipsoid methods. Decentralized convex optimization 
via primal and dual decomposition. Alternating projections. Exploiting 
problem structure in implementation. Convex relaxations of hard prob-
lems, and global optimization via branch and bound. Robust optimization. 
Applications in areas such as control, circuit design, signal processing, 
and communications. Substantial project. Prerequisite: 364A.

3 units, Spr (Boyd, S)

EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics—Applications of Fourier 
theory to the analysis and synthesis of optical imaging and optical data 
processing systems. Propagation and diffraction of light, Fresnel and 
Fraunhofer approximations, Fourier transforming properties of lenses, 
image formation with coherent and incoherent light, transform functions 
of imaging systems, optical data processing, and holography. Prerequisite: 
familiarity with Fourier analysis. Recommended: 261.

3 units, Aut (Hesselink, L)

EE 368. Digital Image Processing—Image sampling and quantization, 
color, point operations, segmentation, linear image filtering and cor-
relation, image transforms, eigenimages, multidimensional signals and 
systems, multiresolution image processing, wavelets, morphological im-
age processing, noise reduction and restoration, simple feature extraction 
and recognition tasks, image registration. Students write and investigate 
image processing algorithms in Matlab. Competitive term project. Pre-
requisites: 261, 278.

3 units, Spr (Girod, B)

EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I—Imaging internal structures 
within the body using high-energy radiation studied from a systems 
viewpoint. Modalities covered: x-ray, computed tomography, and nuclear 
medicine. Analysis of existing and proposed systems in terms of resolu-
tion, frequency response, detection sensitivity, noise, and potential for 
improved diagnosis. Prerequisite: 261.

3 units, not given this year

EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II—Imaging internal structures 
within the body using non-ionizing radiation studied from a systems 
viewpoint. Modalities include ultrasound and magnetic resonance. 
Analysis of ultrasonic systems including diffraction and noise. Analysis 
of magnetic resonance systems including physics, Fourier properties of 
image formation, and noise. Prerequisite: 261.

3 units, Spr (Nishimura, D)

EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction—Reconstruction problems 
from medical imaging, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
computed tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET). 
Problems include reconstruction from non-uniform frequency domain 
data, automatic deblurring, phase unwrapping, reconstruction from incom-
plete data, and reconstruction from projections. Prerequisite: 369B.

3 units, Aut (Pauly, J)

EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design—Issues in high performance 
digital CMOS VLSI design from a system perspective. Topics: wire mod-
eling, logic families, latch design and clocking issues, clock distribution, 
RAMs, ALUs, I/O and I/O noise issues. Final project involves the design 
of a subsystem for a high-speed processor. Extensive use of SPICE. Pre-
requisites: 271 and 313, or consent of instructor.

3 units, not given this year

EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing—Self-optimizing systems whose 
performance is improved through contact with their environments. Feed-
back models for least mean-square adaptation processes. Steepest descent, 
Newton’s method, and Southwell relaxation methods. Random search. 
LMS algorithm. Efficiency measures for adaptive processes. Adaptive 
digital filters, noise canceling and signal enhancement, adaptive antennas, 
adaptive control systems. Original theoretical and experimental research 
projects in electrical engineering and biomedical engineering, teamwork. 
Prerequisites: 263, 264. Recommended: 278.

3 units, Win (Widrow, B)

EE 373B. Adaptive Neural Networks—Adaptive threshold elements, 
feedforward layered networks, back-propagation algorithm. Adaptive 
decision making. Adaptive gaming. Principal components analysis. 
Nonlinear adaptive filtering. Volterra adaptive filtering. Recurrent neural 
networks. Experimental and theoretical applications of neural networks 
to pattern recognition, speech recognition, and self-learning adaptive 
control systems. Reinforcement learning. Cognitive memory, human 
and machine. Original theoretical and experimental research projects 
in electrical engineering and biomedical engineering. Continuation of 
projects begun in 373A. Prerequisite: 373A.

3 units, Spr (Widrow, B)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



14 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 374. Inference in Graphical Models—Graphical models as a unifying 
framework for describing the statistical relationships among large sets of 
variables; computing the marginal distribution of one or a few such vari-
ables. Focus is on sparse graph structures and theoretical analysis. Topics 
include: message passing algorithms; belief propagation; survey propaga-
tion; correlation decay; density evolution; distributional recursions; the 
cavity method; sparse graph codes; multi-user detection; and random 
combinatorial optimization (random K-satisfiability). Prerequisite: 278, 
STATS 116, or CS 228. Recommended: 376A or STATS 217/218.

3 units, not given this year

EE 375. Quantization Noise—The effects of roundoff noise in digital 
computation, signal processing, control, and communication systems. 
Definition of the quantizer. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conver-
sion. Probability density functions, characteristic functions, and moments. 
Statistical analysis of quantization noise. General statistical relations 
between quantization noise, the quantizer input, and the quantizer output. 
Sampling and quantization of Gaussian and other time series. Lineariza-
tion with additive dither signals. Quantization noise in feedback control 
systems, signal processing systems, FFT algorithm, linear and nonlinear 
systems, chaotic systems. Quantizing noise theorems for conditions of 
whiteness, uncorrelatedness, zero mean, and variance of (q^2)/12. Coef-
ficient quantization in digital filters. Recommended: 264, 278.

3 units, Aut (Widrow, B)

EE 376A. Information Theory—Extreme points of communication 
theory: data compression to the entropy limit, and communication at the 
channel capacity limit. Shannon entropy. Rate distortion theory. Huff-
man coding. Kolmogorov complexity. Unified treatment based on the 
asymptotic equipartition theorem. Prerequisite: 178 or 278 or STATS 
116, or equivalent.

3 units, Win (Cover, T)

EE 376B. Information Theory—Rate distortion theory and Kolmogorov 
complexity. Information theory and statistics. Method of types. Stein’s 
lemma. AEP. Information capacity of networks. Slepian-Wolf theorem. 
Optimal investment and information theory. Universal portfolios and 
universal data compression. Maximum entropy and Burg’s theorem. 
Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 378. Statistical Signal Processing—Random signals in electrical 
engineering. Discrete-time random processes: stationarity and ergo-
dicity, covariance sequences, power spectral density, parametric models 
for stationary processes. Fundamentals of linear estimation: minimum 
mean squared error estimation, optimum linear estimation, orthogonality 
principle, the Wold decomposition. Causal linear estimation of stationary 
processes: the causal Wiener filter, Kalman filtering. Parameter estima-
tion: criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher information, Cramer-Rao 
inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality, maximum likelihood estimation, 
method of moments, consistency, efficiency. ARMA parameter estima-
tion: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-Durbin algorithm, least squares 
estimation, moving average parameter estimation, modified Yule-Walker 
method for model order selection. Spectrum estimation: sample covari-
ances, covariance estimation, Bartlett formula, periodogram, periodogram 
averaging, windowed periodograms. Prerequisite: 278.

3 units, Spr (Ozonat, K)

EE 379A. Digital Communication I—Maximum-likelihood data detec-
tion, modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, bandpass systems 
and analysis, intersymbol interference and equalization methods, diversity, 
phase-locking, and synchronization. Prerequisites: 102B, 278.

3 units, Win (Cioffi, J)

EE 379B. Digital Communication II—Basic channel capacity formulae, 
decoding algorithms; Viterbi detection, sequence detectors, and iterative 
decoding methods; partial-response methods, convolutional, trellis, turbo 
codes, and low-density parity check codes; shaping codes. Prerequisites: 
278, 379A. Recommended: 387.

3 units, not given this year

EE 379C. Advanced Digital Communication—Multi-dimensional 
modulation and basis functions, transmit optimization for channels with 
intersymbol interference, discrete multitone (DMT), orthogonal frequency 
division multiplexing (OFDM), vector modulation, generalized decision-
feedback equalization (GDFE). Prerequisite: 379A.

3 units, Spr (Cioffi, J)

EE 380. Seminar on Computer Systems—Current research in the design, 
implementation, analysis, and use of computer systems from integrated 
circuits to operating systems and programming languages.

1 unit, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Allison, D; Long, E)

EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture—Topics include advanced 
instruction-set design and pipelining, wide instruction fetch, branch pre-
diction, out-of-order and speculative execution, memory disambiguation, 
vector processors, simultaneous multithreading, multi-core systems, 
memory hierarchies, and low-level compiler optimizations for processor 
efficiency. Trade-offs among performance, power, and complexity, and 
techniques for addressing them. Design or research project in processor 
architecture. Prerequisites: 108B, 282.

3 units, Spr (Kozyrakis, C)

EE 382C. Interconnection Networks—The architecture and design of 
interconnection networks used to communicate from processor to memory, 
from processor to processor, and in switches and routers. Topics: network 
topology, routing methods, flow control, router microarchitecture, and 
performance analysis. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.

3 units, not given this year

EE 382D. Advanced Computer Arithmetic—Number systems, floating 
point representation, state of the art in arithmetic algorithms, problems in 
the design of high speed arithmetic units. Prerequisite: 282.

3 units, not given this year

EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards—Local area 
networks: MAC addressing; IEEE 802.1 bridging protocols (transparent 
bridging, virtual LANs). Internet routing protocols: Internet protocol 
(IPv4, IPv6, ICMP); interior gateways (RIP, OSPF) and exterior gateways 
(BGP, policy routing); IP multicast (IGMP, DVMRP, CBT, MOSPF, PIM); 
multiprotocol label switching (MPLS). Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.

3 units, Win (Tobagi, F)

EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet—Applica-
tions and requirements. Traffic generation and characterization: voice 
encoding (G.711, G.729, G.723); image and video compression (JPEG, 
H.261, MPEG-2, H.263, H.264), TCP data traffic. Quality impairments and 
measures. Networking technologies: LAN technologies; home broadband 
services (ADSL, cable modems, PONs); and wireless LANs (802.11). 
Network protocols for multimedia applications: resource reservation 
(ST2+, RSVP); differentiated services (DiffServ); and real-time transport 
protocol (RTP, RTCP). Audio-video-data conferencing standards: Internet 
architecture (SDP, SAP, SIP); ITU recommendations (H.320, H.323 and 
T.120); and real-time streaming protocol (RTSP). Prerequisite: 284 or CS 
244A. Recommended: 384A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 384C. Wireless Local Area Networks—Characteristics of wireless 
communication: multipath, noise, and interference. Communications 
techniques: spread-spectrum, CDMA, and OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical 
layer specifications: FHSS, DSSS, IEEE 802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g 
(OFDM). IEEE 802.11 media access control protocols: carrier sense 
multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), point coordination 
function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated services. IEEE 802.11 
network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure modes, access point 
functionality. Management functions: synchronization, power manage-
ment and association. Current research papers in the open literature. 
Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.

3 units, Spr (Tobagi, F)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 15

EE 384M. Network Algorithms—Theory and practice of designing 
and analyzing algorithms arising in networks. Topics include: designing 
algorithms for load balancing, switching, congestion control, network 
measurement, the web infrastructure, and wireless networks; and 
analyzing the performance of algorithms via stochastic network theory. 
Algorithm design using randomization, probabilistic sampling, and other 
approximation methods. Analysis methods include the use of large devia-
tion theory, fluid models, and stochastic comparison. Research project. 
Prerequisite: 278 or CS 365.

3 units, Spr (Prabhakar, B)

EE 384S. Network Architectures and Performance Engineering—
Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance network 
engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic modeling, queue-
ing networks and congestion management, dynamic programming and 
task/processor scheduling, network dimensioning and optimization, and 
simulation methods. Applications for design of high-performance archi-
tectures for wireline/wireless networks and the Internet, including: traffic 
modeling, admission and congestion control, quality of service support, 
power control in wireless networks, packet scheduling in switches, video 
streaming over wireless links, and virus/worm propagation dynamics and 
countermeasures. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisites: basic network-
ing technologies and probability.

3 units, Spr (Bambos, N; Prabhakar, B)

EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures I—First of two-course sequence. 
Theory and practice of designing packet switches and routers. Evolution 
of switches and routers. Output scheduling: fairness, delay guarantees, 
algorithms. Unicast switching: blocking phenomena and their allevia-
tion, connection between switch scheduling and bipartite graph match-
ing. Multicast switching. Theoretical complements: simple queueing 
models, Bernoulli and Poisson processes, graph matching algorithms, 
urn problems, stability analysis using Lyapunov functions, fluid models. 
Prerequisites: 284 or CS 244A, 178 or 278 or STAT 116.

3 units, Win (McKeown, N; Prabhakar, B)

EE 384Y. Packet Switch Architectures II—Second of two-course se-
quence. Theory and practice of designing packet switches and routers. Ad-
dress lookup: exact matches, longest prefix matches, performance metrics, 
hardware and software solutions. Packet classifiers: for firewalls, QoS, 
and policy-based routing; graphical description and examples of 2-D clas-
sification, examples of classifiers, theoretical and practical considerations.

3 units, Spr (McKeown, N)

EE 385A. Digital Systems Reliability Seminar—Student/faculty dis-
cussions of research problems in the design of reliable digital systems. 
Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for testability, production testing, 
and system reliability. Emphasis is on student presentations and Ph.D. 
thesis research. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.

1-4 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (McCluskey, E)

EE 386. Robust System Design—Causes of system malfunctions; 
techniques for building robust systems that avoid or are resilient to such 
malfunctions through built-in error detection and correction, prediction, 
self-test, self-recovery, and self-repair; case studies and new research 
problems. Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.

3 units, Spr (Mitra, S)

EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes—Theory and implementation 
of algebraic codes for detection and correction of random and burst errors. 
Introduction to finite fields. Linear block codes, cyclic codes, Hamming 
codes, Fire codes, BCH codes, Reed-Solomon codes. Decoding algorithms 
for BCH and Reed-Solomon codes. Prerequisites: elementary probability, 
linear algebra.

3 units, not given this year

EE 388. Modern Coding Theory—Tools for analysis and optimization 
of iterative coding systems. LDPC, turbo and, RA codes. Optimized 
ensembles, message passing algorithms, density evolution, and analytic 
techniques. Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, Win (Montanari, A)

EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering—
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual 
or team activities may involve lab experimentation, design of devices or 
systems, or directed reading.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering—
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written report 
or written examination required. Letter grade given on the basis of the 
report; if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

EE 392B. Introduction to Imaging Sensors—Design and analysis: sili-
con photodetectors; CCD and CMOS passive and active sensor operation; 
noise and FPN analysis; spatial resolution and MTF; SNR and dynamic 
range; high dynamic range architectures; A/D conversion approaches. 
Analysis of the signal path in a digital camera starting from the optics, 
through the sensor, the A/D converter, to the different color processing 
steps. MATLAB camera simulator is used to explore various tradeoffs 
in camera design. Prerequisites: undergraduate level device, circuit, and 
system background equivalent to 102A, 101A,B; and familiarity with 
noise analysis.

3 units, not given this year

EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits—Similar to former 318. 
Solving logic design problems with CAD tools for VLSI circuits. Exact 
and heuristic algorithms for logic synthesis. Representation and optimiza-
tion of combinational logic functions (encoding problems, binary decision 
diagrams) and of multiple-level networks (algebraic and Boolean methods, 
don’t-care set computation, timing verification, and optimization);and 
modeling and optimization of sequential functions and networks (retim-
ing), semicustom libraries, and library binding. Prerequisites: familiarity 
with logic design, algorithm development, and programming.

3 units, not given this year

EE 392R. Charged Particle Optics—Electron optics of charged particle 
instruments including transmission electron microscope, scanning elec-
tron microscope and related tools, mass and energy spectrometers, electron 
beam lithography tools, focused ion beam systems, electron diffraction, 
proximal probe tools such as the scanning tunneling microscope. Topics 
include sources, first-order focusing of electrons and ions, third-order 
aberrations, space-charge effects and diffraction. Goal is to compute the 
optical parameters of axially-symmetric magnetic and electric lenses 
and to be familiar with the principles of operation of the above charged-
particle systems and the factors limiting their performance. Prerequisites: 
undergraduate geometrical optics and vector calculus or 217.

3 units, not given this year

EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug—Seminars by industry 
professionals in digital IC manufacturing test and silicon debug. Topics 
include yield and binsplit modeling, defect types and detection, debug 
hardware, physical analysis, and design for test/debug circuits. Case stud-
ies of silicon failures. Prerequisite: basic digital IC design (271 or 371).

1 unit, Aut (Stinson, J)

EE 392V. Signal Processing in VoIP Systems—VoIP protocols: RTP and 
SIP. Voice encoding standards: PCM, ADPCM, and LPC. Speech qual-
ity measurement: MOS, PESQ, and E-model. Characterization of VoIP 
impairments: delay, jitter, packet loss, and clock skew. Signal processing 
algorithms to improve VoIP quality: echo cancellation, adaptive jitter 
buffering, packet loss concealment, and decoder clock synchronization. 
Prerequisites: 261 and 278, or equivalents.

3 units, Win (Narasimha, M)

EE 392Y. Vision Sensor Networks Lab—Operation of wireless sensor 
networks emphasizing algorithm development for distributed vision 
processing in image sensor networks. Project platforms at the Wireless 
Sensor Networks Lab are used for conducting term projects. Students 
identify potential areas for long-term research. Application areas in smart 
environments. Prerequisites: 179, 279, or 359; and 261, 263, or 278); and 
programming in Matlab and C.

3 units, not given this year   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



16 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching—Open 
to advanced EE graduate students who plan to make teaching their career. 
Students conduct a section of an established course taught in parallel by 
an experienced instructor. Enrollment limited.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr (Wong, S)

EE 398. Image and Video Compression—Condensed version of 398A,B 
sequence. The principles of source coding for the efficient storage and 
transmission of still and moving images. Entropy and lossless coding tech-
niques. Run-length coding and fax compression. Arithmetic coding. Rate-
distortion limits and quantization. Lossless and lossy predictive coding. 
Transform coding, JPEG. Subband coding, wavelets, JPEG2000. Motion-
compensated coding, MPEG standards. Students investigate image and 
video compression algorithms in Matlab or C. Prerequisites: 261, 278.

3 units, Win (Girod, B)

EE 398A. Image Communication I—First of two-course series. Prin-
ciples and systems for digital image communication, emphasizing source 
coding for efficient storage and transmission of still and moving images. 
Fundamentals and still image communication techniques. Lossless cod-
ing principles. Arithmetic coding, run-length coding. Facsimile coding. 
Lossy compression principles, scalar quantization, vector quantization. 
Lossless and lossy predictive coding. Transform coding. Multiresolu-
tion coding, subband coding, and wavelets. EZW and SPIHT coding. 
Embedded image representations. Standards: ITU-T T.4, T.6, JBIG, 
JPEG, JPEG-2000. Students investigate image compression algorithms 
in Matlab. Prerequisites: 261, 278.

3 units, not given this year

EE 398B. Image Communication II—Second of two-course series. 
Digital video communication techniques. Interframe coding. Conditional 
replenishment. Motion-compensated prediction. Motion-compensated 
hybrid coding. Motion estimation. Rate distortion analysis and optimiza-
tion of video coding schemes. Advanced motion compensation techiques. 
Scalable layered video representations. Error-resilient video coding. Ap-
plications: videotelephony, videoconferencing, digital TV broadcasting, 
Internet video streaming, wireless video. Standards: MPEG-1, MPEG-2, 
MPEG-4, ITU-T, H.261, H.263, H264. Students investigate video com-
pression algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project. Prerequisite: 398A.

3 units, not given this year

EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research—Limited to candidates for the 
degree of Engineer or Ph.D.

1-15 units, Aut, Win, Spr, Sum (Staff)

EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management—Theme 
for 2007-08 is innovation systems and processes in Asia. Government fund-
ing, university/industry relations, and technology transfer in Asia, with the 
U.S. as point of comparison. How companies and entrepreneurs convert 
invention into profit. Guest speakers from industry and government.

1 unit, Aut (Dasher, R)

EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology Research—
Theme for 2007-08 is novel memory technologies and their applications.  
Nanomaterials such as complex metal oxides and ferroelectrics, and nano-
scale phenomena such as electron spin, and their integration into novel 
circuits and system architectures. Challenges of developing real-world 
applications. Recommended: basic electronics.

1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)

EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries—Patterns 
and challenges of entrepreneurship in Asia. Business and technology issues 
in start-up companies in Asian economies. Guest speakers from industry, 
government, and universities. May be repeated for credit.

1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)

EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory—Fabrication, 
simulation, and testing of a highly simplified 1.5 micron CMOS process 
developed for this course. Practical aspects of IC fabrication including 
silicon wafer cleaning, photolithography, etching, oxidation, diffusion, 
ion implantation, chemical vapor deposition, physical sputtering, and 
wafer testing. Students perform simulations of the CMOS process using 
process simulator TSUPREM4 of the structures and electrical parameters 
that should result from the process flow in the lab. Taught in the Stanford 
Nanofabrication Facility (SNF) in the Center for Integrated Systems (CIS). 
Preference to students pursuing doctoral research program requiring SNF 
facilities. Enrollment limited to 20. Prerequisites: 212, 216, consent of 
instructor.

3-4 units, Win (Saraswat, K)

EE 414. Design of Discrete RF Circuits for Communications Sys-
tems—Students design, build, and test GHz transceivers using microstrip 
construction techniques and discrete components. The design, construc-
tion, and experimental characterization of representative transceiver 
building blocks: low noise amplifiers (LNAs), diode ring mixers, PLL-
based frequency synthesizers, voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs), 
power amplifiers (PAs), and microstrip filters and patch antennas. The 
characteristics of passive microstrip components (including interconnect). 
Emphasis is on a quantitative reconciliation of theoretical predictions and 
extensive experimental measurements performed with spectrum and net-
work analyzers, time-domain reflectometers (TDRs), noise figure meter 
and phase noise analyzers. Prerequisites: 314, 344.

3 units, Spr (Lee, T)

EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering—Neuroscience and electrical en-
gineering, focusing on principles and theory in modern neural prosthetic 
systems (brain-computer or brain-machine interfaces). Electrical proper-
ties of neurons, information encoding, neural measurement techiques and 
technology, processing electronics, information decoding and estimators, 
and statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: 214, 278.

3 units, Win (Shenoy, K)

EE 453. Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation—Research on the radia-
tion belts of Earth and other planets. Physical processes which lead to mag-
netic trapping of electrons and ions. Analytical tools for trapped radiation 
research. The nature of radiation belts, source and loss mechanisms, and 
the relation of radiation belts to other geophysical phenomena.

3 units, not given this year

EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging—
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS) based on 
the use of radio frequency pulses to manipulate magnetization. Analysis 
and design of major types of RF pulses in one and multiple dimensions, 
analysis and design of sequences of RF pulses for fast imaging, and use of 
RF pulses for the creation of image contrast in MRI. Prerequisite: 369B.

3 units, not given this year

EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory—Universal 
schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel coding and decod-
ing, prediction, denoising, and filtering. Characterization of performance 
limitations in the stochastic settting: entropy rate, rate-distortion function, 
channel capacity, Bayes envelope for prediction, denoising, and filtering. 
Lempel-Ziv lossless compression, and Lempel-Ziv based schemes for 
lossy compression, channel coding, prediction, and filtering. Discrete 
universal denoising. Compression-based approach to denoising. The 
compound decision problem. Prerequisites: 278, 376A,B.

3 units, not given this year

EE 478. Topics in Multiple User Information Theory—Topics in mul-
tiple user source and channel coding; multiple access channel, correlated 
source coding, broadcast channel, interference channel, relay channel, and 
channels with feedback; asymptotic capacity of networks; source coding 
with side information, multiple descriptions, channels with state, MIMO 
channels. Prerequisite: 376A.

3 units, not given this year

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EN
G

IN
EE

RI
N

G



Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08 | 17

EE 479. Multiuser Digital Transmission Systems—Multiuser com-
munications design, modulation, and reception. Capacity regions and 
fundamentally optimum designs for multiple access, broadcast, and in-
terference channels. Iterative waterfilling, optimum spectrum balancing, 
band preference methods, vectoring, and multi-user generalized decision 
feedback equalization (GDFE) as used for vector broadcast and multiple 
access. Prerequisite: 379C.

3 units, not given this year

EE 492M. Space-Time Wireless Communications—For EE gradu-
ate students and wireless design engineers. Space-time wireless (smart 
antenna) communications and improvements in capacity, coverage, and 
quality of wireless networks. Multiple input multiple output (MIMO), and 
its use in WiFi and WIMAX systems and in next generation mobile systems 
such as 3GPPLTE. Prerequisites: 276, 278, 279. Recommended: 359.

3 units, Win (Paulraj, A)

COGNATE COURSES
Courses approved to fulfill EE program requirements at the level of 

300-499 EE courses are listed below. See respective department listings 
for course descriptions. For applicability to a degree program, see http://
eebulletin.stanford.edu/; click on the 2007-08 EE courses database link 
and select the Cognates layout.

APPPHYS 304. Lasers Laboratory
3 units, Win (Byer, R)

APPPHYS 305. Nonlinear Optics Laboratory
3 units, Spr (Byer, R)

APPPHYS 387. Quantum Optics and Measurements
3 units, Win (Yamamoto, Y), alternate years, not given next year

APPPHYS 388. Mesoscopic Physics and Nanostructures
3 units, Spr (Yamamoto, Y), alternate years, not given next year

CS 228. Probabilistic Models in Artificial Intelligence
3 units, Win (Koller, D)

CS 229. Machine Learning
3 units, Aut (Ng, A)

CS 243. Advanced Compiling Techniques
3-4 units, Win (Lam, M)

CS 245. Database Systems Principles
3 units, Win (Garcia-Molina, H)

CS 315A. Parallel Computer Architecture and Programming
3 units, Win (Olukotun, O)

CS 343. Advanced Topics in Compilers
3 units, Spr (Lam, M)

CS 344. Projects in Computer Networks
3 units, Spr (McKeown, N)

CS 346. Database System Implementation
3-5 units, not given this year

CS 347. Transaction Processing and Distributed Databases
3 units, Spr (Garcia-Molina, H)

CS 348A. Computer Graphics: Geometric Modeling
3-4 units, Win (Guibas, L)

CS 348B. Computer Graphics: Image Synthesis Techniques
3-4 units, Spr (Hanrahan, P)

CS 528. Broad Area Colloquium for Artificial Intelligence, Geometry, 
Graphics, Robotics, and Vision

1 unit, Aut, Spr (Staff)

ENGR 207A,B. Linear Control Systems I,II
3 units, A: Aut, B: Win (Lall, S)

ENGR 209A. Analysis and Control of Nonlinear Systems
3 units, Win (Staff)

ENGR 210B. Advanced Topics in Computation for Control 
3 units, not given this year (Lall, S)

ENGR 341. Micro/Nano Systems Design and Fabrication Labora-
tory

3-5 units, Spr (Solgaard, O; Pruitt, B)

MATSCI 316. Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology
3 units, Win (Cui, Y)

MATSCI 343. Organic Semiconductors for Electronics and Photonics
3 units, Win (McGehee, M; Peumans, P)

MS&E 310. Linear Programming
3 units, Aut (Ye, Y)

MS&E 311. Optimization
3 units, Win (Ye, Y)

MS&E 313. Vector Space Optimization
3 units (Luenberger, D) alternate years, not given this year

MS&E 321. Stochastic Systems
3 units, Spr (Glynn, P)

MS&E 322. Stochastic Calculus and Control
3 units, Win (Glynn, P), alternate years, not given next year

MS&E 336. Topics in Game Theory with Engineering Applications
3 units, Spr (Staff)

MS&E 338. Advanced Topics in Information Science and Technology
3 units, not given this year(Van Roy, B)

MS&E 339. Approximate Dynamic Programming
3 units, not given this year(Van Roy, B)

MS&E 351. Dynamic Programming and Stochastic Control
3 units, Spr (Veinott, A)

MUSIC 420. Signal Processing Models in Musical Acoustics
3-4 units, Win (Smith, J)

MUSIC 421. Audio Applications of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
3-4 units, Spr (Smith, J)

MUSIC 422. Perceptual Audio Coding
3 units, Win (Bosi-Goldberg, M)

PSYCH 221. Applied Vision and Image Systems
1-3 units, Win (Wandell, B)

RAD 226. In Vivo Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Imaging
3 units, Win (Spielman, D)

STATS 315A. Modern Applied Statistics: Learning
2-3 units, Aut (Tibshirani, R)

STATS 315B. Modern Applied Statistics: Data Mining
2-3 units, Win (Friedman, J)

   
SC

H
O

O
L 

O
F 

EA
RT

H
 S

C
IE

N
C

ES

   
El

ec
tri

ca
l E

ng
in

ee
ri

ng



18 | Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08

OVERSEAS STUDIES
Courses approved for the Electrical Engineering major and taught 

overseas can be found in the “Overseas Studies” section of this bulletin, 
or in the Overseas Studies office, 126 Sweet Hall.

BERLIN
OSPBER 40B. Introductory Electronics

5 units, Aut, Win (Howe, R), Spr (Wong, S)

OSPBER 50B. Introductory Science of Materials
4 units, Aut, Win, Spr (Staff)

FLORENCE
OSPFLOR 50F. Introductory Science of Materials

4 units, Aut, Win, Spr (Staff)

KYOTO
OSPKYOTO 40K. Introductory Electronics

5 units, Spr (Wong, S)

PARIS
OSPPARIS 40P. Introductory Electronics

5 units, Aut (Howe, R), Spr (Wong, S)

OSPPARIS 50P. Introductory Science of Materials
4 units, Aut, Win (Staff)

This file has been excerpted from the Stanford Bulletin, 2007-08, pages 
202-218. Every effort has been made to ensure accuracy; post-press 
changes may have been made here. Contact the editor of the bulletin 
at arod@stanford.edu with changes or corrections. See the bulletin 
web site at http://bulletin.stanford.edu for additional information.   

SC
H

O
O

L 
O

F 
EN

G
IN

EE
RI

N
G


