Mechanical
Engineering
(College of Engineering)
Department Office: 6195 Etcheverry Hall, (510) 642-1338
www.me.berkeley.edu
Chair: Albert Pisano, Ph.D.
Professors
Alice M. Agogino (The Roscoe and Elizabeth Hughes Chair
in Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University.
Decision and expert systems
†Stanley A. Berger (The Montford G. Cook Chair in the
College of Engineering), Ph.D. Brown University. Fluid
mechanics
David B. Bogy (The William S. Floyd Jr. Distinguished
Professor in Engineering), Ph.D. Brown University.
Elasticity, plasticity, computer mechanics
Van P. Carey, Ph.D. State University of New York-Buffalo.
Transport in multiphase systems, thermophysics of
phase-change processes
James Casey, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Continuum mechanics
Juh-Yuan Chen, Ph.D. Cornell University. Turbine
combustion, chemical kinetics, numerical simulation
Hari Dharan, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Composite materials
Robert W. Dibble, Ph.D. University of Wisconsin.
Combustion, gas dynamics
David A. Dornfeld (Associate Dean, Interdisciplinary Studies,
and The Will C. Hall Family Chair in Engineering), Ph.D. University of Wisconsin. Manufacturing processes,
robotics
Carlos Fernandez-Pello (Associate Dean, Graduate
Division), Ph.D. University of California at San Diego.
Combustion, heavy and condensed fuels
Michael Y. Frenklach, Ph.D. Hebrew University. Chemical
kinetics, combustion chemistry, chemical vapor deposition
Ralph Greif, Ph.D. Harvard University. Heat and mass
transfer
Costas Grigoropoulos, Ph.D. Columbia University. Heat
transfer, laser materials processing
J. Karl Hedrick (The James Marshall Wells Chair in
Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University.
Control systems, transportation systems
Roberto Horowitz, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Automatic control systems design, robotics
George C. Johnson (Associate Dean, Special Programs), Ph.D. Stanford University. Ultrasonic stress evaluation
Homayoon Kazerooni, D.Sc. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Mechatronics, robotics
Tony Keaveny, Ph.D. Cornell University. Tissue engineering
and biomechanics
Kyriakos Komvopoulos, Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Tribology, contact mechanics, mechanical
behavior of materials
*George Leitmann, Ph.D.
Dorian Liepmann, Ph.D. University of California, San Diego.
Classical fluid dynamics, bio-fluid mechanics
†Dennis K. Lieu, D. Eng. University of California, Berkeley.
High-speed electromechanic devices
Liwei Lin (Vice Chair, Graduate Study), Ph.D. University of
California, Berkeley. NSF-Career MEMS
(microelectromechanical systems)
Fai Ma, Ph.D. California Institute of Technology. Vibration and control
Arun Majumdar (Director, Berkeley Nanosciences and
Nanoengineering Institute), Ph.D. University of California,
Berkeley. Nanoscale thermal and biomolecular
engineering, micromechanical systems
Alaa Mansour, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Structural reliability and safety, probabilistic dynamics of
Benson Tongue, Ph.D. Princeton University. Chaotic
oscillations in dynamic systems
Paul K. Wright (Chief Scientist, CITRIS, College of
Engineering, and The A. Martin Berlin Professor of
Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. University of Birmingham.
Manufacturing processes, automation
Ronald W. Yeung, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Hydromechanics, numerical modeling, surface waves,
ocean space systems
Xiang Zhang, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Nanofabrication and processing in mechanical
engineering
Cyril P. Atkinson, M.S.M.E. (Emeritus)
*David M. Auslander, Sc.D. (Emeritus)
Gilles M. Corcos, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Iain Finnie, D.Sc., Sc.D. (The Fife Professor Emeritus)
Joseph Frisch, M.S. (Emeritus)
Frank E. Hauser, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Maurice Holt, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Chieh S. Hsu, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Franklin C. Hurlbut, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
†Clayton D. Mote Jr., Ph.D. (The FANUC Professor of
Mechanical Systems Emeritus)
Antoni K. Oppenheim, Ph.D, D.Sc. (Emeritus)
Patrick J. Pagni, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Charles W. Radcliffe, M.S., M.E. (Emeritus)
Robert F. Sawyer, Ph.D. (The Class of ’35 Professor of
Energy Emeritus)
Samuel A. Schaaf, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Frederick S. Sherman, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Erich G. Thomsen, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
George J. Trezek, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Kent Udell, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Associate Professors
Stephen Morris, Ph.D. Johns Hopkins University.
Geophysical fluid dynamics
Lydia L. Sohn, Ph.D. Harvard University. Integrated
microfluidic devices for biological sensing
Tarek I. Zohdi, Habilitation Degree, University of Hanover,
Germany. Ph.D. University of Texas, Austin.
Computational mechanics
Assistant Professor
Sara McMains, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Computer graphics and geometric modeling
Adjunct Professors
Samuel Mao, Ph.D.
Klaus Weinmann, Ph.D.
Overview
Mechanical engineers contribute to society by solving
problems in transportation, energy, the environment,
and human health. The mechanical engineer
needs a thorough preparation in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, manufacturing processes, properties
of materials, mechanics, fluid mechanics,
thermodynamics, as well as intensive design and
laboratory experience. The program of study includes
basic subjects common to all engineering
fields, fundamental subjects important to all mechanical
engineers and specialization in one or
more phases of mechanical engineering.
The undergraduate program begins at the freshman
level with study in the humanities, mathematics,
basic sciences, and the foundation design
course, Engineering 28. In subsequent years students
learn to use engineering science concepts as
tools for systems analysis and design. The design
and laboratory experience is a major component of
the senior year. Students have the opportunity to
develop a broad hands-on understanding of the design
process involved in significant engineering
systems. Undergraduate specialization is provided
in the choice of technical electives which may be
selected from the subject areas of applied mechanics,
automatic controls, electro-mechanical
systems analysis, energy conversion, fluid mechanics,
heat and mass transfer, manufacturing,
materials processing, mechanical design, ocean
engineering, nuclear engineering, thermodynamics,
biomedical, and environmental engineering.
Because of the widening range of technical problems
and the limited amount of specialization available in
the undergraduate curriculum, qualified students
should consider graduate study to expand their scientific
and technological capability. Further details
on undergraduate and graduate fields of emphasis
in mechanical engineering are available in the
Announcement of the College of Engineering. Please
visit the department web site at www.me.berkeley.edu
for information detailing the undergraduate
and graduate program.
The B.S. program is accredited in mechanical engineering
by the Engineering Accreditation Commission
of the Accreditation Board for Engineering
and Technology, 111 Market Place, Suite 1050,
Baltimore, MD 21202-4012. Telephone: (410) 347-
7700.
Curriculum for the
Bachelor’s Degree
A total of 120 units is required, including:
Lower Division. Mathematics 1A-1B, 53 and 54;
Chemistry 1A; Physics 7A-7B-7C (Chemistry 1B or
Biology 1A may be taken for Physics 7C); Engineering
77, 28, 36, 45.
Upper Division. Mechanical Engineering 102, 104,
105 or C105B, 106, 107A, 107B, 109, C124; Engineering
190; Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences 100; Civil Engineering 130.
Electives. The remaining 120 units consist of electives,
including the following:
(1) Humanities/Social Studies Electives. These include
six courses of at least 3 units each in humanities
and social studies selected from an approved
list of courses. Two of these courses must fulfill the
College of Engineering Reading and Composition
requirement. Refer to www.coe.berkeley.edu/
current_students/hssreq.pdf for details or go to 308
McLaughlin Hall for a handout.
(2) The 12-unit technical elective requirement. Of
the 12-unit technical electives, at least 9 must be
in upper-division elective mechanical engineering
courses. Of these nine, 3 units must be in an elective
course selected from the following list:
Eng 128, Advanced Engineering Design Graphics
Mec Eng 101, High Mix/Low Volume Manufacturing
Mec Eng 110, Mechanical Engineering Project Engineering
Mec Eng 119, Introduction to MEMS
Mec Eng 128, Computer-Aided Mechanical Design
Mec Eng 130, Design of Planar Machinery
Mec Eng 135, Design of Microprocessor-Based
Mechanical Systems
Mec Eng 142, Heating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration
Mec Eng 145, Computer-Aided Thermal Design
Mec Eng 165, Ocean-Environment Mechanics
Students can receive up to 3 units of technical
elective credit for work on a research project in
Mec Eng H194, Honors Undergraduate Research.
Any upper division course taught by mechanical
engineering faculty may be used as part of the 9
units of upper-division mechanical engineering
courses. The other technical elective units can be
chosen from courses in engineering, physical
science, mathematics, or statistics. Engineering
courses that cannot be used for the ME technical
elective units are: Engineering 24, 39, 92, 111,
115, 193, and 198.
Physical science is defined to include physics,
chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, and
the biological sciences.
No more than one lower-division course taken from
the Approved List of Lower-Division Technical Electives
can be used to satisfy part of the technical
elective requirement. See end of the next section,
Options Electives, for the approved list.
Options Electives
Upper-Division Technical Electives. The following
groups of electives are presented to aid undergraduates
in focusing their choices on specific professional
goals. Each group contains more technical
elective courses than can be taken within the
standard allowance. (For requirements see footnotes
under Sample Programs in the Announcement
of the College of Engineering.) Of the four
technical electives required in the ME program,
three must be upper-division ME electives. The
electives selected need not be from any single
group.
Controls. Mechanical Engineering 132, 133, 134,
135, 175; Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
120, 128; Engineering 119, 177.
Biomechanical Engineering. Biology 1A; Bioengineering
153, 210, C212, C213, 214, 290A; Electrical
Engineering and Computer Sciences 145A,
145B, 145L, 145M, 146; Mechanical Engineering
117, 127, 133, 134, 135, 142, C176; Integrative Biology
131, 132; Molecular and Cell Biology 32,
120, 130, 173, 213; Materials Science 118.
Combustion. Chemical Engineering 140, 141, 142;
Civil Engineering 111, 168; Engineering 117, C150,
160; Materials Science 148; Mechanical Engineering
140, 151.
Computer-Aided Engineering. Engineering 28, 76,
119, 128, 177; Mechanical Engineering 128.
Environmental Engineering. Architecture 100A,
100B, 140; Engineering 191; Mechanical Engineering
110, 140, 142, 151, 165, 173; Civil Engineering
104N, 111, 117, 173, 175; Nuclear Engineering
162; Geography 144, 147.
Fluid Mechanics and Aeronautics. Engineering
117; Mechanical Engineering 133, 134, 151, 163,
165, 167, 173, 175, 185; Civil Engineering 131.
General Mechanical Engineering. Engineering 117,
128, 166, 191; Mechanical Engineering 110, 133,
134, 165, 173, 175.
Heat and Mass Transfer. Chemical Engineering
150B, 171; Engineering 117; Mechanical Engineering
140, 142, 145, 151.
Materials Processing and Manufacturing Management.
Engineering 102, 120; Mechanical Engineering
101, 110, 122, 127, 128, 133, 134, 151;
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
115, 140, 170, 180; Business Administration 111.
Mechanical Engineering Design. Engineering 128;
Mechanical Engineering 110, 119, 127, 128, 130,
132, 133, 134, 135, 142, 145, 151, 165, C176.
Mechatronics. Electrical Engineering 104; Engineering
66, 166; Mechanical Engineering 101,
128, 130, 132, 133, 134, 135.
Nuclear Engineering. Nuclear Engineering 101,
102, 120, 150, 161; Mechanical Engineering 134,
151, 173; Physics 137A; Mathematics 120A, 120B.
Ocean Engineering. Mechanical Engineering 101,
127, 128, 134, 164, 165, 167; Civil Engineering
120, C180.
Robotics and Automation. Mechanical Engineering
101, 132, 134, 133, 135, 136, 170, 175; Electrical
Engineering and Computer Sciences 125; Industrial
Engineering and Operations Research 140,
170.
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics. Engineering
117; Mechanical Engineering 127, 133, 134, 163,
165, 170, 173, 175, C180, 185; Mathematics 104.
Lower-Division Technical Electives. (Only one
course may be used from the following list to meet
the 12-unit technical elective requirement, and
it must be taken for a letter grade.) Astronomy 7;
Biology 1A, 1B; Chemistry 1B, 5; Civil Engineering
70; Molecular and Cell Biology 11, 32; Statistics 20;
or any lower-division technical course required by
another engineering major.
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
Mechanical Engineering / 359
Mechanical Engineering Minor
The department offers a minor in mechanical engineering
that is open to all students not majoring in
ME who have completed the necessary prerequisites
for the minor requirements. Information is available
at www.me.berkeley.edu/new/undergrad/current.html.
Graduate Programs
Both master’s and doctoral programs are available.
The student may choose either a scientific emphasis
in particular areas or integrated studies directed
to professional objectives. Master of Science and
Ph.D. degrees are the relevant degrees for the scientific
emphasis, and Master of Engineering and
D.Eng. degrees for the professional one. Specialization
is offered in the following mechanical engineering
disciplines: (1) controls and dynamics, (2)
design, (3) fluids, (4) mechanics, (5) materials, and
(6) thermal sciences. Specialization is also offered
in the following focus areas: (1) bioengineering, (2)
manufacturing, (3) micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS) and nanoengineering, (4) mechatronics,
(5) energy and environment, and (6) ocean
engineering. Details on various aspects of graduate
study are available at www.me.berkeley.
edu and from the Announcement of the College of
Engineering.
Note: In addition to the courses listed below, the
Department of Mechanical Engineering offers the
following courses, found in the Engineering section
of this catalog: 28, Graphic Communication in Engineering;
117, Methods of Engineering Analysis;
128, Advanced Engineering Design Graphics; 191,
Engineering Ethics; 193, California Engineer Staff;
230A, Engineering Analysis; 230B, Engineering
Analysis; 231, Mathematical Methods in Engineering;
266A, Finite Difference Methods for
Fluid Dynamics; 266B, Spectral Methods for Fluid
Dynamics.
Lower Division Courses
24. Freshman Seminars. (1) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-4 to be graded on a letter-grade basis.
Sections 5-8 to be graded on a passed/not passed
basis. The Berkeley Seminar Program has been designed
to provide new students with the opportunity to
explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a
small-seminar setting. Berkeley Seminars are offered
in all campus departments, and topics vary from department
to department and semester to semester.
(F,SP) Staff
40. Thermodynamics. (3) Students will receive no
credit for 105B after taking 40. Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A, Engineering 77, Mathematics 1B, and
Physics 7B. This course introduces the fundamentals
of energy storage, thermophysical properties of liquids
and gases, and the basic principles of thermodynamics
which are then applied to various areas of engineering
related to energy conversion and air conditioning. (F,SP)
Carey
84. Sophomore Seminar. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar
per week per unit for 15 weeks. One and one-half
hours of seminar per week per unit for 10 weeks. Two
hours of seminar per week per unit for eight weeks.
Three hours of seminar per week per unit for five
weeks. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a lettergrade
basis. Prerequisites: At discretion of instructor.
Sophomore seminars are small interactive courses offered
by faculty members in departments all across the
campus. Sophomore seminars offer opportunity for
close, regular intellectual contact between faculty
members and students in the crucial second year. The
topics vary from department to department and semester
to semester. Enrollment limited to 15 sophomores. (F,SP)
Staff
85. Introduction to Solid Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 53 and 54 (co-requisite);
Physics 7A. A review of equilbrium for particles and
rigid bodies. Application to truss structures. The concepts
of deformation, strain, and stress. Equilibrium
equations for a continuum. Elements of the theory of
linear elasticity. The states of plane stress and plane
strain. Solution of elementary elasticity problems
(beam bending, torsion of circular bars). Euler buckling
in elastic beams. (F,SP) Papadopoulos
C85. Introduction to Solid Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 53 and 54 (co-requisite);
Physics 7A. A review of equilbrium for particles and
rigid bodies. Application to truss structures. The concepts
of deformation, strain, and stress. Equilibrium
equations for a continuum. Elements of the theory of
linear elasticity. The states of plane stress and plane
strain. Solution of elementary elasticity problems (beam
bending, torsion of circular bars). Euler buckling in elastic
beams. Also listed as Civil and Environmental
Engineering C30. (F,SP) Armero, Dharan, Li
92. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering. (1)
One hour of lecture per week. Must be taken on a
passed/not passed basis. An outline of the field of mechanical
engineering designed to acquaint the entering
student with the profession and the activities of the
Department. (F) Staff
98. Supervised Independent Group Studies. (1-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Hours to be arranged.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Organized group
study on various topics under the sponsorship and direction
of a member of the Mechanical Engineering
faculty. (F,SP) Staff
Upper Division Courses
101. High Mix/Low Volume Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Upper
division standing in engineering or consent of instructor.
Fundamentals of high mix/low volume (HMLV)
manufacturing systems including manufacturing fundamentals,
unit operations and manufacturing line considerations
for work in process (WIP), manufacturing
lead time (MLT), economics, quality monitoring; HMLV
systems fundamentals including just in time (JIT), kanban,
buffers and line balancing; class project/case
studies for design of competitive manufacturing systems.
(F) Dornfeld, McMains
102. Mechanical Engineering Design. (3) Two hours
of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
C124 and Engineering 28. Formerly 102B.
Application of principles of mechanics, materials science,
and manufacturing processes to the design of
components and complete machines that must meet
prescribed functional requirements. Synthesis and
analysis of a major machine design project. (F,SP)
Kazerooni
104. Engineering Mechanics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Engineering 36, 77, and Mathematics 54. This
course is an introduction to the dynamics of particles
and rigid bodies. The material, based on a Newtonian
formulation of the governing equations, is illustrated
with numerous examples ranging from one-dimensional
motion of a single particle to planar motions of
rigid bodies and systems of rigid bodies. (F,SP) Staff
105. Thermodynamics. (3) Students will receive no
credit for 105 after taking 105B. Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A, Mathematics 53, Physics 7A, and Engineering
77. This course introduces the basic principles
of thermodynamics which are then aplied to various
areas of engineering related to energy conversion
and air conditioning. (F,SP) Staff
C105B. Thermodynamics and Biothermodynamics.
(3) Students will receive no credit for C105B after
taking 105. Three hours of lecture and one hour of
discussion per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 1A,
Mathematics 53, Physics 7A, and Engineering 77, or
equivalents. This course introduces the basic principles
of thermodynamics and their application to a variety of
biological processes and systems. Some coverage of
conventional engineering applications is also included.
Also listed as Bioengineering C105B. (F,SP) Carey
106. Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 104.
This course introduces the fundamentals and techniques
of fluid mechanics with the aim of describing
and controlling engineering flows. (F,SP) Staff
107A. Experimentation and Measurement. (3) Three
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 104, 105, 106, Electrical Engineering
100, Engineering 190. Co-requisite 109. Methods
and procedures for experimental investigation of
mechanical engineering phenomena and systems. Experimental
design, measurement systems, data acquisition,
and data analysis. Modeling of measurement
and experimental systems. (F,SP) Staff
107B. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. (3) Six
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 107A. Experimental
investigation of engineering systems and of
phenomena of interest to mechanical engineers. Design
and planning of experiments. Analysis of data and
reporting of experimental results. (F,SP) Staff
108. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 85. This course covers elastic
and plastic deformation under static and dynamic
loads. Failure by yielding, fracture, fatigue, wear, and
environmental factors are also examined. Topics include
engineering materials, structure-property relationships,
elastic deformation and multiaxial loading,
plastic deformation and yield criteria, dislocation plasticity
and strengthening mechanisms, creep, stress
concentration effects, fracture, fatigue, and contract
stresses. (F,SP) Komvopoulos
109. Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 105
and 106. This course covers transport processes of
mass, momentum, and energy from a macroscopic
view with emphasis both on understanding why matter
behaves as it does and on developing practical
problem solving skills. The course is divided into four
parts: introduction, conduction, convection, and radiation.
(F,SP) Staff
110. Introduction to Product Development. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 102B,
107A (which may be taken concurrently). The course
provides an experience in preliminary project planning
of complex and realistic mechanical engineering systems.
Design concepts and techniques are introduced,
and the student’s design ability is developed in a design
or feasibility study chosen to emphasize ingenuity
and provide wide coverage of engineering topics.
Innovative systems are preferred. Design optimization
and social, economic, and political implications are included.
Both individual and group oral presentations
are made, and participation in conferences is required.
Staff
C117. Structural Aspects of Biomaterials. (4) Three
hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Biology 1A, Engineering 45, Civil Engineering
130 or Bioengineering 102, and Engineering
190. This course covers the structure and mechanical
functions of load bearing tissues and their replacements.
Natural and synthetic load-bearing biomaterials
for clinical applications are reviewed. Biocompatibility of
biomaterials and host response to structural implants
are examined. Quantitative treatment of biomechanical
issues and constitutive relationships of tissues are
covered in order to design biomaterial replacements
for structural function. Material selection for load
bearing applications including reconstructive surgery,
orthopedics, dentistry, and cardiology are addressed.
Mechanical design for longevity including topics of fatigue,
wear, and fracture are reviewed. Case studies
that examine failures of devices are presented. This
course includes a teaching/design laboratory component
that involves design analysis of medical devices
and outreach teaching to the public community. Several
problem-based projects are utilized throughout the
semester for design analysis. In addition to technical
content, this course involves rigorous technical writing
assignments, oral communication skill development
360 / Mechanical Engineering
and teamwork. Also listed as Bioengineering C117.
(SP) Pruitt
118. Introduction to Nanotechnology and Nanoscience.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A and Physics 7B. This course introduces
Engineering students (juniors and seniors) to
the field of nanotechnology and nanoscience. The
course has two components: (1) Formal lectures. Students
receive a set of formal lectures introducing them
to the field of nanotechnology and nanoscience. The
material covered includes nanofabrication technology
(how one achieves the nanometer length scale, from
“bottom up” to “top down” technologies), the interdisciplinary
nature of nanotechnology and nanoscience
(including areas of chemistry, material science,
physics, and molecular biology), examples of nanoscience
phenomena (the crossover from bulk to
quantum mechanical properties), and applications
(from integrated circuits, quantum computing, MEMS,
and bioengineering). (2) Projects. Students are asked
to read and present a variety of current journal papers
to the class and lead a discussion on the various
works. (F,SP) Lin, Sohn
119. Introduction to MEMS (Microelectromechanical
Systems). (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 100, Physics 7B.
Fundamentals of microelectromechanical systems including
design, fabrication of microstructures; surfacemicromachining,
bulk-micromachining, LIGA, and other
micromachining processes; fabrication principles of integrated
circuit device and their applications for making
MEMS devices; high-aspect-ratio microstructures;
scaling issues in the micro scale (heat transfer, fluid
mechanics and solid mechanics); device design, analysis,
and mask layout. (F) Staff
122. Processing of Materials in Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: C124; Civil Engineering 130. Fundamentals
of manufacturing processes (metal forming,
metal cutting, welding, joining, and casting); selection
of metals, plastics and other materials relative to the
design and choice of manufacturing processes. (SP)
Weinmann
C124. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(3) Students will receive no credit after taking
102A or Materials Science and Engineering 113. Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 130 and Engineering
45. Formerly 102A and Materials Science and Engineering
113. This course covers elastic and plastic deformation
under static and dynamic loads. Prediction
and prevention of failure by yielding, fracture, fatigue,
wear, and environmental factors are addressed. Design
issues pertaining to materials selection for loadbearing
applications are discussed. Case studies of
engineering failures are presented. Topics include engineering
materials, structure-property relationships,
materials selection for design, mechanical behavior of
polymers and design of plastic components, complex
states of stress and strain, elastic deformation and
multiaxial loading, plastic deformation and yield criteria,
dislocation plasticity and strengthening mechanisms,
creep, effects of stress concentrations, fracture,
fatigue, and contact stresses. Also listed as Materials
Science and Engineering C113. (F,SP) Ritchie
127. Composite Materials—Analysis, Design, Manufacture.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Civil Engineering 130 or equivalent course
in mechanics of materials; Engineering 36 and 45.
Properties and microstructure of high-strength fiber
materials (glass, carbon, polymer, ceramic fibers) and
matrix materials (polymer, metal, ceramic, and carbon
matrices). Specific strength and stiffness of high-performance
composites. Rule of mixtures. Stress, strain
transformations. Elastic properties of a single orthotropic
ply. Laminated plate theory. Failure criteria.
Design of composite structures and components. Manufacturing
processes. (F) Dharan
128. Computer-Aided Mechanical Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 102B, Engineering 28, Civil Engineering
130, and Mathematics 53, 54, or consent of instructor.
Introduction to design (not drafting) via computers. Using
MATLAB software on X-windows workstations, the
student will be introduced to a variety of mechanical
design techniques and apply those techniques to the
design of beams, automobile engine components, planar
machine elements, linkages, and flexure hinges.
These techniques include ad-hoc methods, exhaustive
numeration, grid studies, and informal optimizations.
(SP) Lin
130. Design of Planar Machinery. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
104. Synthesis, analysis, and design of planar
machines. Kinematic structure, graphical, analytical,
and numerical analysis and synthesis. Linkages, cams,
reciprocating engines, gear trains, and flywheels. (SP)
Youssefi
132. Dynamic Systems and Feedback. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Math 53, 54, Physics 7A-7B. Physical
understanding of dynamics and feedback. Linear feedback
control of dynamic systems. Mathematical tools
for analysis and design. Stability. Modeling systems
with differential equations. Linearization. Solution to linear,
time-invariant differential equations. (SP) Staff
133. Mechanical Vibrations. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 104. An introduction to
the theory of mechanical vibrations including topics
of harmonic motion, resonance, transient and random
excitation, applications of Fourier analysis and convolution
methods. Multidegree of freedom discrete systems,
including principal mode, principal coordinates,
and Rayleigh’s principle. (SP) Tongue
134. Automatic Control Systems. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week, and three
hours of laboratory every other week. Prerequisites:
132. Linear control systems analysis and design in
transform domain and time domain. Transfer functions
and state equations. Frequency response and Nyquist
stability. Loop shaping. State feedback controller
and observer design. Applications to mechanical and
mechatronics systems. Computer control. (F,SP) Staff
135. Design of Microprocessor-Based Mechanical
Systems. (4) Three hours of lecture and three hours
of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering 77.
This course provides preparation for the conceptual
design and prototyping of mechanical systems that use
microprocessors to control machine activities, acquire
and analyze data, and interact with operators. The
architecture of microprocessors is related to problems
in mechanical systems through study of systems,
including electro-mechanical components, thermal
components and a variety of instruments. Laboratory
exercises lead through studies of different levels of
software. (SP) Auslander
140. Combustion Processes. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
105, 106, and 109. 106 and 109 may be taken
concurrently. Fundamentals of combustion, flame
structure, flame speed, flammability, ignition, stirred reaction,
kinetics and nonequilibrium processes, pollutant
formation. Application to engines, energy production,
and fire safety. (F) Fernandez-Pello
142. Thermal Environmental Control. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105 or equivalent;
106, 109 (may be taken concurrently). The
course will focus on analysis of thermodynamics and
transport phenomena associated with a broad spectrum
of thermal control applications. Emphasis will be
on application of theoretical concepts to the design of
advanced thermal control systems. Topics covered will
include enhanced vapor compression heat pumps, gas
compression cycles, psychrometrics, cooling towers,
dessicant cooling, absorption refrigeration, JouleThompson
cooling, cryogenics, thermoelectric cooling,
heat exchangers, heat pipes, and advanced insulation
concepts. Applications in thermal control of buildings,
automobiles, spacecraft, and electronics will be discussed.
(F) Staff
146. Energy Conversion Principles. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
105, 106, 109 (which may be taken concurrently),
and Engineering 7, or equivalents. This
course covers the fundamental principles of energy
conversion processes, followed by development of theoretical
and computational tools that can be used to
analyze energy conversion processes. The course also
introduces the use of modern computational methods
to model energy conversion performance characteristics
of devices and systems. Performance features,
sources of inefficiencies, and optimal design strategies
are explored for a variety of applications, which may
include conventional combustion based and Rankine
power systems, energy systems for space applications,
solar, wind, wave, thermoelectric, and geothermal
energy systems. (F,SP) Carey
151. Advanced Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106 and 109. Basic
principles of heat transfer and their application. Subject
areas include steady-state and transient system analyses
for conduction, free and forced convection, boiling,
condensation and thermal radiation. (SP) Staff
163. Engineering Aerodynamics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106. Introduction to the
lift, drag, and moment of two-dimensional airfoils,
three-dimensional wings, and the complete airplane.
Calculations of the performance and stability of airplanes
in subsonic flight. (F) Savas
164. Marine Statics and Structures. (3) Students will
and parameters, kinematics of rigid bodies, and the
Newton-Euler equations of motion for rigid bodies. The
course material will be illustrated with real-world examples
such as gyroscopes, spinning tops, vehicles,
and satellites. Applications of the material range from
vehicle navigation to celestial mechanics, numerical
simulations, and animations. (F) O’Reilly, Tongue
173. Fundamentals of Acoustics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104. Plane and spherical
sound waves. Sound intensity. Propagation in
tubes and horns. Resonators. Standing waves. Radiation
from oscillating surface. Reciprocity. Reverberation
and diffusion. Electro-acoustic loud speaker and
microphone problems. Environmental and architectural
acoustics. Noise measurement and control. Effects on
man. (SP) Staff
175. Intermediate Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
104 or equivalent. This course introduces and investigates
Lagrange’s equations of motion for particles
and rigid bodies. The subject matter is particularly relevant
to applications comprised of interconnected and
constrained discrete mechanical components. The material
is illustrated with numerous examples. These
range from one-dimensional motion of a single particle
to three-dimensional motions of rigid bodies and systems
of rigid bodies. (SP) Staff
C176. Orthopedic Biomechanics. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion/computer workshop
per week. Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 130. Students
will learn the application of engineering concepts
including statics, dynamics, optimization theory, composite
beam theory, beam-on-elastic foundation theory,
Hertz contact theory and materials behavior. Topics
will include forces and moments acting on human
joints; composition and mechanical behavior of orthopedic
biomaterials; design/analysis of artificial joint,
spine, and fracture fixation prostheses; musculo-skeletal
tissues including bone, cartilage, tendon, ligament, and
muscle; osteoporosis and fracture-risk predication of
bones; and bone adaptation. Students will be challenged
in a MATLAB-based project to integrate the
course material in an attempt to gain insight into contemporary
design/analysis/problems. Also listed as Bioengineering
C119. (SP) Keaveny
C180. Engineering Analysis Using the Finite Element
Method. (3) Three hours of lecture and two
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering
77 or Computer Science 61A; Mathematics 53
and 54; senior status in engineering or applied science.
This is an introductory course on the finite element
method and is intended for seniors in engineering
and applied science disciplines. The course covers
the basic topics of finite element technology, including
domain discretization, polynomial interpolation, application
of boundary conditions, assembly of global arrays,
and solution of the resulting algebraic systems.
Finite element formulations for several important field
equations are introduced using both direct and integral
approaches. Particular emphasis is placed on computer
simulation and analysis of realistic engineering
problems from solid and fluid mechanics, heat transfer,
and electromagnetism. The course uses FEMLAB,
a multiphysics MATLAB-based finite element program
that possesses a wide array of modeling capabilities
and is ideally suited for instruction. Assignments will
involve both paper- and computer-based exercises.
Computer-based assignments will emphasize the practical
aspects of finite element model construction and
analysis. Also listed as Civil and Environmental Engineering
C133. (SP) Staff
185. Introduction to Continuum Mechanics. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Physics 7A; Mathematics 53, 54.
Kinematics of deformation, the concept of stress, conservation
of mass and balance of linear momentum,
angular momentum and energy. Mechanical constitutive
equations for ideal fluid, linear elastic solid. (F)
Staff
190L. Practical Control System Design: A Systematic
Loopshaping Approach. (1) One hour of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 132 or Electrical Engineering
128 (Electrical Engineering 20 may suffice) or similar introductory
experience regarding feedback control systems.
After a review of basic loopshaping, we introduce
the loopshaping design methodology of McFarlane and
Glover, and learn how to use it effectively. The remainder
of the course studies the mathematics underlying
the new method (one of the most prevalent
advanced techniques used in industry) justifying its validity.
(F,SP) Packard
190Y. Practical Control System Design: A Systematic
Optimization Approach. (1) One hour of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 132 or Electrical Engineering
128 (Electrical Engineering 20 may suffice) or similar
introductory experience regarding feedback control
systems. The Youla-parametrization of all stabilizing
controllers allows certain time-domain and
frequency-domain closed-loop design objectives to be
cast as convex optimizations, and solved reliably using
off-the-shelf numerical optimization codes. This
course covers the Youla parametrization, basic elements
of convex optimizaation, and finally control design
using these techniques. (F,SP) Packard
H194. Honors Undergraduate Research. (2-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: 3.3
or higher upper division technical GPA and consent of
instructor and adviser. Final report required. Students
who have completed a satisfactory number of advanced
courses may pursue original research under
the direction of one of the members of the staff. A
maximum of 3 units of H194 may be used to fulfill
technical elective requirements in the Mechanical Engineering
program (unlike 198 or 199, which do not
satisfy technical elective requirements). (F,SP) Staff
198. Directed Group Studies for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for
credit. One to four hours of directed group study per
week. Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Upper division standing and good academic
standing. Group study of a selected topic or topics
in Mechanical Engineering. Credit for 198 or 199
courses combined may not exceed 4 units in any single
term. See College for other restrictions. (F,SP) Staff
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Course
may be repeated for credit. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor and major adviser.
Supervised independent study. Enrollment restrictions
apply; see the Introduction to Courses and Curricula
section of this catalog. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
C212. Heat and Mass Transport in Biomedical Engineering.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
106, 109. Formerly Mechanical Engineering
212. Fundamental processes of heat and mass transport
in biological systems; organic molecules, cells,
biological organs, whole animals. Derivation of mathematical
models and discussion of experimental procedures.
Applications to biomedical engineering. Also
listed as Bioengineering C212. (SP) Rubinsky
C213. Fluid Mechanics of Biological Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106 or
equivalent, or consent of instructor. Fluid mechanical
aspects of various physiological systems, the circulatory,
respiratory, and renal systems. Motion in large
and small blood vessels. Pulsatile and peristaltic flows.
Other biofluidmechanical flows: the ear, eye, etc. Instrumentation
for fluid measurements in biological systems
and for medical diagnosis and applications.
Artifical devices for replacement of organs and/or functions,
e.g. blood oxygenators, kidney dialysis machines,
artifical hearts/circulatory assist devices. Also
listed as Bioengineering C213. (F) Berger
C214. Advanced Tissue Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
C176, 185; graduate standing or consent of
instructor. Knowledge of MATLAB or equivalent. The
goal of this course is to provide a foundation for characterizing
and understanding the mechanical behavior
of load-bearing tissues. A variety of mechanics topics
will be introduced, including anisotropic elasticity and
failure, cellular solid theory, biphasic theory, and quasilinear
viscoelasticity (QLV) theory. Building from this
theoretical basis, we will explore the constitutive behavior
of a wide variety of biological tissues. After
taking this course, students should have sufficient
background to independently study the mechanical
behavior of most biological tissues. Formal discussion
section will include a seminar series with external
speakers. Also listed as Bioengineering C214. (SP)
Staff
C217. Biomimetic Engineering—Engineering from
Biology. (3) Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering
or consent of instructor. Study of nature’s
solutions to specific problems with the aim of determining
appropriate engineering analogs. Morphology,
scaling, and design in organisms applied to engineering
structures. Mechanical principles in nature and their
application to engineering devices. Mechanical behavior
of biological materials as governed by underlying
microstructure, with the potential for synthesis into
engineered materials. Trade-offs between redundancy
and efficiency. Students will work in teams on projects
where they will take examples of designs, concepts,
and models from biology and determine their potential
in specific engineering applications. Also listed as Integrative
Biology C217 and Bioengineering C217.
(F,SP) Dharan
C218. Introduction to MEMS Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering or science;
undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Physics, fabrication, and design of micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS). Micro-and nano-fabrication
processes, including silicon surface and bulk micromachining
and non-silicon micromachining. Integration
strategies and assembly processes. Microsensor
and microactuator devices: electrostatic, piezoresistive,
piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic transduction.
Electronic position-sensing circuits and electrical and
mechanical noise. CAD for MEMS. Design project is
required. Also listed as Electrical Engineering C245.
(F,SP) Staff
C219. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS).
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor. Formerly
219. This course is aimed to provide basic understanding
of integrated circuit (IC) processes and microelectromechanical
system (MEMS). Technologies
including analyses, design, and manufacturing processes
of MEMS will be introduced. The first part of
the course emphasizes IC processes including thin film
deposition, lithography, and etching. The second part
of the course deals with micromachining processes including
surface-, bulk-micromachining, LIGA and other
processes. Also listed as Electrical Engineering C246.
(SP) Pisano
220. Precision Manufacturing. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 101, 102B, or consent of
instructor. Introduction to precision engineering for manufacturing.
Emphasis on design and performance of
precision machinery for manufacturing. Topics include
machine tool elements and structure, sources of error
(thermal, static, dynamic, process related), precision
machining processes and process models (diamond
turning and abrasive (fixed and free) processes), sensors
for process monitoring and control, metrology, actuators,
machine design case studies and examples of
precision component manufacture. (SP) Dornfeld
221. High-Tech Product Design and Rapid Manufacturing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week enhanced
by a semester-long “hands-on” rapid prototyping project.
Prerequisites: 101; Recommended: Basic metalprocessing,
IC manufacturing; CAD, C, and Java helpful.
This is a “manufacturing survey course” that deals with
Internet-based design, rapid prototyping, and a review
of manufacturing processes relevant to today’s production
of consumer electronics or electro-mechanical
devices. It also aims to provide a balanced view for the
“Management of Technology.” (F) Wright
222. Advanced Manufacturing Processes. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122 or consent
of instructor. This course presents an overview of
the theory of manufacturing processes, machine tool
design, and process issues in quality, production rate,
and flexibility of manufacturing. Nontraditional manufacturing
processes will be introduced. Topics covered
362 / Mechanical Engineering
include overview of models of conventional manufacturing
(material removal, joining, forming, and deforming),
elements of machine tool error and machine
tool component design, nontraditional manufacturing
processes (laser, water jet, electrical discharge machining,
electo-chemical machining), rapid prototyping,
and process selection, optimization, and planning issues.
This course incorporates a laboratory term project
in the application of nontraditional manufacturing
processes. (SP) Weinmann
C223. Polymer Engineering. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Civil Engineering 130, Engineering 45. A survey
of the structure and mechanical properties of advanced
engineering polymers. Topics include rubber elasticity,
viscoelasticity, mechanical properties, yielding, deformation,
and fracture mechanisms of various classes
of polymers. The course will discuss degradation
schemes of polymers and long-term performance
issues. The class will include polymer applications in
bioengineering and medicine. Also listed as Bioengineering
C223. (F) Staff
224. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering
130; Engineering 45. This course covers
elastic and plastic deformation under static and dynamic
loads. Prediction and prevention of failure by
yielding, fracture, fatigue, creep, corrosion, and wear.
Basic elasticty and plasticity theories are discussed.
(SP) Dharan, Zohdi
C225. Deformation and Fracture of Engineering
Materials. (4) Four hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Civil Engineering 130, Engineering 45. This
course covers deformation and fracture behavior of engineering
materials for both monotonic and cyclic loading
conditions. Also listed as Materials Science and
Engineering C212. (SP) Ritchie
226. Tribology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 102B, 104, C124. Surface interactions.
Fundamentals of contact mechanics. Friction theories.
Types of measurement of wear. Response of materials
to surface tractions. Plastic deformation, void/crack
nucleation and crack propagation. Delamination wear.
Microstructural effects in wear processes. Mechanics
of layered media. Solid film and boundary liquid
film lubrication. Friction and wear of polymers and
fiber-reinforced polymeric composites. Brief introduction
to metal cutting and tool wear mechanisms. (SP)
Komvopoulos
227. Mechanical Behavior of Composite Materials.
(3) Students will receive no credit for 227 after taking
290J. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor. Formerly
290J. Response of composite materials (fiber and particulate-reinforced
materials) to static, cyclic, creep and
thermomechanical loading. Manufacturing processinduced
variability, and residual stresses. Fatigue behavior,
fracture mechanics and damage development.
Role of the reinforcement-matrix interface in mechanical
behavior. Environmental effects. Dimensional stability
and thermal fatigue. Application to polymer, metal,
ceramic, and carbon matrix composites. (SP) Dharan
228. Computer-Aided, Optimal Mechanical Design.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing and the equivalent of both 102B
and 128. This course will cover the optimal mechanical
design of mechanical systems and components. A
variety of optimization techniques will be developed,
applied to mechanical design, and implemented on the
computer. (SP) Agogino, McMains
229. Design of Basic Electro-Mechanical Devices.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
EECS 100, graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental principles of magnetics, electro-magnetics,
and magnetic materials as applied to design
and operation of electro-mechanical devices. Type of
device to be used in a particular application and dimensions
of parts for the overall design will be discussed.
Typical applications covered will be linear and
rotary actuators, stepper motors, AC motors, and DC
brush and brushless motors. A design project is required.
(F,SP) Staff
230. Real-Time Applications of Mini and Micro
Computers. (4) Three hours of lecture and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in engineering or consent of instructor for advanced
undergraduates. Mini and micro computers,
operating in real time, have become ubiquitous components
in engineering systems. The purpose of this
course is to build competence in the engineering use
of such systems through lectures stressing small computer
structure, programming, and output/input operation,
and through laboratory work with mini and micro
computer systems. (F) Auslander
232. Advanced Control Systems I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
134 recommended. Input-output and state
space representation of linear continuous and discrete
time dynamic systems. Controllability, observability,
and stability. Modelling and identification. Design and
analysis of single- and multi-variable feedback control
systems in transform and time domain. State observer.
Feedforward/preview control. Application to engineering
systems. (F) Tomizuka, Horowitz
233. Advanced Control Systems II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
232. Linear Quadratic Optimal Control,
Stochastic State Estimation, Linear Quadratic Gaussian
Problem, Loop Transfer Recovery, Adaptive Control and
Model Reference Adaptive Systems, Self Tuning Regulators,
Repetitive Control, Application to engineering
systems. (SP) Tomizuka, Horowitz
234. Multivariable Control System Design. (3) Students
may not take 234 for credit if they have taken
291C. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
232 or EECS 221A, as well as firm foundation in classical
control. Formerly 291C. Analysis and synthesis
techniques for multi-input (MIMO) control systems. Emphasis
is on the effect that model uncertainty has on
the design process. (SP) Packard, Poolla
235. Switching Control and Computer Interfacing.
(4) Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 230. Design and analysis of
control systems utilizing switching elements. Electronic
and microprocessor devices for sequential logic. Applications
to control of mechanical systems and control
computer interfacing. (SP) Auslander
C236. Control and Optimization of Distributed Parameters
Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Distributed systems and PDE models of physical
phenomena (propagation of waves, network traffic,
water distribution, fluid mechanics, electromagnetism,
blood vessels, beams, road pavement, structures,
etc.). Fundamental solution methods for PDEs: separation
of variables, self-similar solutions, characteristics,
numerical methods, spectral methods. Stability analysis.
Adjoint-based optimization. Lyapunov stabilization.
Differential flatness. Viability control. Hamilton-Jacobibased
control. Also listed as Electrical Engineering
C291 and Civil and Environmental Engineering C291F.
(SP) Bayen
237. Control of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 232. Fundamental properties of
nonlinear systems. Stability of nonlinear systems. Controller
Design via Lyapunov methods. Equivalent Linearization
methods including limit cycle prediction. (SP)
Hedrick
239. Advanced Design and Automation. (4) Three
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering
or science and one course in Control. This course will
provide students with a solid understanding of smart
products and the use of embedded microcomputers in
products and machines. The course has two components:
1) Formal lectures. Students receive a set of formal
lectures on the design of smart machines and
products that use embedded microcomputers. the materials
cover machine components, actuators, sensors,
basic electronic devices, embedded microprocessor
systems and control, power transfer components, and
mechanism design. 2) Projects. Students will design
and construct prototype products that use embedded
microcomputers. (F) Kazerooni
240A. Advanced Marine Structures I. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 240A after taking C240A/
Ocean Engineering C240A. Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing; Statistics 25
or equivalent. Formerly C240A. This course introduces
a probabilistic description of ocean waves and wave
loads acting on marine structures. These topics are followed
with discussion of structural strength and reliability
analysis. (F,SP) Mansour
240B. Advanced Marine Structures II. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 240B after taking C240B/
Ocean Engineering C240B. Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Formerly
C240B. This course is concerned with the structural response
of marine structures to environmental loads.
Overall response of the structure as well as the behavior
of its members under lateral and compressive
loads are discussed. (F,SP) Mansour
241A. Marine Hydrodynamics I. (3) Students will receive
no credit for 241A after taking C241A/Ocean Engineering
C241A. Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Engineering 165 recommended or graduate
standing. Formerly C241A. Navier-Stokes Equations.
Boundary-layer theory, laminar, and turbulent.
Frictional resistance. Boundary layer over water surface.
Separated flow modeling. Steady and unsteady
flow. Momentum theorems. Three-dimensional waterwave
theory. Formulation of wave resistance of ships
mentary kinetic theory of gases and evaluation of
transport properties. (F) Carey
255. Energy Transfer in Gaseous and Condensed
Phases. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
254 or consent of instructor. Course introduces
statistical thermodynamics, kinetic theory, and
reaction theories, all at the level of microscopic energy
transfer processes, used for modeling of gaseous and
gas-surface reactive systems. (SP) Frenklach
256. Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 105, 106, and 109. 140 is recommended.
Combustion modelling. Multicomponent
conservation equations with reactions. Laminar and
turbulent deflagrations. Rankine-Hugoniot relations.
Diffusion flames. Boundary layer combustion, ignition,
and stability. (SP) Dibble
257. Advanced Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 256. Critical analyses of
combustion phenomenon. Conservation relations applied
to reacting systems. Reactions are treated by
both asymptotic and numerical methods. Real hydrocarbon
kinetics are used; where available reduced kinetic
mechanics are introduced. Flame propagation
theory and experiments are discussed in detail for both
laminar and turbulent flows. (F) Staff
258. Heat Transfer with Phase Change. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 151. Heat
transfer associated with phase change processes.
Topics include thermodynamics of phase change,
evaporation, condensation, nucleation and bubble
growth, two phase flow, convective boiling and condensation,
melting and solidification. (SP) Carey
259. Microscale Thermophysics and Heat Transfer.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
151, 254, or consent of instructor. This course introduces
advanced statistical thermodynamics, nonequilibrium
thermodynamics, and kinetic theory concepts
used to analyze thermophysics of microscale systems
and explores applications in which microscale transport
plays an important role. (SP) Carey, Majumdar
260A. Advanced Fluid Mechanics I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
106; 185 (strongly recommended) or consent
of instructor. Introduces the foundations of fluid
mechanics. Exact flow solutions are used to develop
a physical insight of the fluid flow phenomena. Rigorous
derivation of the equations of motion. Incompressible
and compressible potential flows. Canonical
viscous flows. (F) Staff
260B. Advanced Fluid Mechanics II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
260A or consent of instructor. Develops a
working knowledge of fluid mechanics by identifying
the essential physical mechanism in complex canonical
flow problems which leads to simplified yet accurate
formulation. Boundary layers, creeping flows,
rotational flows, rotating flows. Stability and transition,
introduction to turbulence. (SP) Staff
260C. Advanced Fluid Mechanics III. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 260A and 260B or
consent of instructor. A presentation of four related topics
in high Reynolds number flow: stability theory,
waves, rotating flows and geophysical/astrophysical
fluid dynamics. Linear stability of classical, shear, convecting,
and rotating flows are reviewed. Weakly nonlinear
stability is examined with amplitude equations
and numerical studies of sub-critical instabilities of pipe
and channel flows are discussed. Rapidly rotating
flows are analyzed by asymptotically deriving the
quasi-geotrophic and shallow water equations. Examples
of geophysical flows include vortex dynamics
in the atmosphere and ocean, jet streams and waves
(Rossby, Poincare, inertial, internal gravity, and Kelvin).
The mathematical formulation of hyperbolic waves in
stratified, free surface and compressible flows is discussed
and applied to flows with shocks and breaking
waves. (F,SP) Marcus
260D. Advanced Fluid Mechanics IV. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 260A and B, or 241A; or consent of instructor.
Expanded coverage of compressible flow and
boundary layers beyond material in 260A-260B. Timeharmonic
elements of free-surface flows. (F,SP) Berger
262. Theory of Fluid Sheets and Fluid Jets. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185
and 106, or equivalents. Conservation laws in three dimensions
for inviscid and viscous fluids. Direct formulation
of non-linear theories for sheets and jets for
these fluids with surface tension and gravity. Application
to water waves, hydraulic jump, flow in waterfall,
planing of a boat. Capillary instability in a viscous jet.
(F) Marcus
263. Turbulence. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 260A-260B or equivalent. Physics of turbulence:
Summary of stability and transition. Description
of turbulence phenomena. Tools for studying
turbulence. Homogeneous turbulence, shear turbulence,
rotating turbulence. Summary of engineering
models. Discussion of recent advances. (SP) Savas
267. Geophysical Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 265A or equivalent.
An introduction to the fluid mechanics and atmospheric
motions of the Earth’s interior (mantle and core). Buoyant
creeping flow. Rotation inside a sphere. Modes of
wave propagation in rotation and stratified flows. (F)
Staff
C268. Physicochemical Hydrodynamics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: A first graduate
course in fluid mechanics is recommended. An
introduction to the hydrodyamics of capillarity and wetting.
Balance laws and short-range forces. Dimensionless
numbers, scaling and lubrication approximation.
Rayleigh instability. Marangoni effect. The moving contact
line. Wetting and short-range forces. The dynamic
contact angle. Dewetting. Coating flows. Effect of surfactants
and electric fields. Wetting of rough or porous
surfaces. Contact angles for evaporating systems. Also
listed as Chemical Engineering C268. (F,SP) Morris
273. Oscillations in Linear Systems. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104 and 133. Response
of discrete and continuous dynamical systems,
damped and undamped, to harmonic and general
time-dependent loading. Convolution integrals and
Fourier and Laplace Transform methods. Lagrange’s
equations; Eigensolutions; Orthogonality; generalized
coordinates; nonreciprocal and degenerate systems;
Rayleigh quotient. (F) Ma
274. Random Oscillations of Mechanical Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104
and 133. Random variables and random processes.
Stationary, nonstationary, and ergodic proceses. Analysis
of linear and nonlinear, discrete and continuous,
mechanical systems under stationary and nonstationary
excitations. Vehicle dynamics. Applications to
failure analysis. Stochastic estimation and control and
their applications to vibratory systems. (SP) Ma
275. Advanced Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 175. Review of Lagrangian
dynamics. Legendre transform and Hamilton’s equations,
Cyclic coordinates, Canonical transformations,
Hamilton-Jacobi theory, integrability. Dynamics of
asymmetric systems. Approximation theory. Current
topics in analytical dynamics. (F) Staff
277. Oscillations in Nonlinear Systems. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 175. Oscillations
in nonlinear systems having one or two degrees
of freedom. Qualitative and quantitative methods:
graphical, iteration, perturbation, and asymptotic methods.
Self-excited oscillations, limit cycles, and domains
of attraction. (F,SP) Szeri
280A. Introduction to the Finite Element Method.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
or computer laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
50A-50B; some familiarity with elementary
field theories of solid/fluid mechancis and/or thermal
science. Formerly 280. Weighted-residual and variational
methods of approximation. Canonical construction
of finite element spaces. Formulation of element and
global state equations. Applications to linear partial differential
equations of interest in engineering and applied
science. (F) Papadopoulos, Zohdi
280B. Finite Element Methods in Nonlinear Continua.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
280A or equivalent; background in continuum
mechanics at the level of 185. A brief review of continuum
mechanics. Consistent linearization of kinematical
variables and balance laws. Incremental formulations of
the equations of motion. Solution of the nonlinear field
equations by Newton’s method and its variants. General
treatment of constraints. Applications to nonlinear
material and kinematical modeling on continua. (SP)
Papadopoulos
281. Methods of Tensor Calculus and Differential
Geometry. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 53, 54. Methods of tensor calculus
and classical differential geometry. The tensor
concept and the calculus of tensors, the RiemannChristoffel
tensor and its properties, Riemannian and
Euclidean spaces. Geometry of a surface, formulas of
Weingarten, and equations of Gauss and Codazzi. (F)
Staff
282. Theory of Elasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Fundamentals and general
theorems of the linear theory of elasticity (in three
dimensions) and the formulation of static and dynamic
boundary value problems. Application to torsion, flexure,
and two-dimensional problems of plane strain,
generalized plane stress, and bending of plates. Representation
of basic field equations in terms of displacement
potentials and stress functions. Some basic
three-dimensional solutions. (SP) Bogy, Steigmann
283. Wave Propagation in Elastic Media. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. Propagation
of mechanical disturbances in unbounded and
bounded media. Surface waves, wave reflection and
transmission at interfaces and boundaries. Stress
waves due to periodic and transient sources. Some
additional topics may vary with instructor. (F) Bogy
284. Nonlinear Theory of Elasticity. (3) Students will
receive no credit for 284 after taking 284A. Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281.
Formerly 284A. Fundamentals of nonlinear theory of
elasticity. Exact solutions in elastostatics by inverse
and semi-inverse methods. The method of successive
approximations. Small deformations superposed on
finite deformations. Nonlinear oscillations, shocks and
acceleration waves, progressive waves and standing
waves of finite amplitude, waves in pre-stressed solids.
(F,SP) Casey
285A. Foundations of the Theory of Continuous
Media. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185. Formerly 285. A general development of
thermodynamics of deformable media, entropy production,
and related entropy inequalities. Thermomechanical
response of dissipative media, including those
for viscous fluids and nonlinear elastic solids. A discussion
of invariance, internal constraints, material
symmetry, and other special topics. (F,SP) Casey
285C. Electrodynamics of Continuous Media. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: A first
course in continuum mechanics (such as 185 or Civil Engineering
231.). Formerly 284B. This course presents
the fundamentals of electromagnetic interactions in deformable
continuous media. It develops the background
necessary to understand various modern technologies
involving MEMS devices, sensors and actuators, plasmas,
and a wide range of additional phenomena. The
emphasis of this course is on fundamentals, beginning
with Maxwell’s equations in vacuum, the aether relations
and their extension to electromagnetic interactions
in materials. The treatment is general within the
limits of nonrelativistic physics and accommodates
coupling with mechanical and thermal effects. The topics
discussed are all developed at a general level including
the effects of finite deformations. Various linear
models, which are especially useful in applications, are
developed through specialization of general theory.
This course will be of interest to students in engineering,
physics, and applied mathematics. (F,SP)
Steigmann
286. Theory of Plasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Formulation of the theory
of plasticity relative to loading surfaces in both
364 / Mechanical Engineering
strain space and stress space and associated loading
criteria. Nonlinear constitutive equations for finitely deformed
elastic-plastic materials. Discussion of strainhardening
and special cases. Applications. (F) Casey,
Papadopoulos
287. Multiscale Modeling and Design of New Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185 or equivalent, 280A or equivalent. This
course focuses on methods for the modeling, analysis,
numerical simulation, and design of microheterogeneous
materials, with a central theme being the determination
of relationships between the microstructure
and the acroscopic response or “macroscale property.”
The course is self-contained and is designed in an interdisciplinary
manner for graduate students in engineering,
applied mathematics, materials science, and
physics who are interested in methods to accelerate
the laboratory analysis and design of new materials.
Examples draw primarily from various mechanical, diffusive,
and thermal applications, although the techniques
developed apply to any partial differential system
possessing oscillatory coefficients. (SP) Zohdi
288. Theory of Elastic Stability. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 273. Dynamic
stability of elastic bodies. Small motion on finite deformation.
Classical treatments of buckling problems.
Snapthrough and other global stability problems. Stability
theory based upon nonlinear three-dimensional
theory of elasticity. (F) Steigmann
289. Theory of Shells. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281. A direct formulation
of a general theory of shells and plates based on the
concept of Cosserat (or Directed) surfaces. Nonlinear
constitutive equations for finitely deformed elastic shells.
Linear theory and a special nonlinear theory with small
strain accompanied by large or moderately large rotation.
Applications. (F,SP) Johnson, Steigmann
290A. Nonlinear Dynamics of Continuous Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 175,
185. This course uses methods from dynamical systems
theory for the analysis of the nonlinear dynamics of elastic
bodies. Various methods for modeling these bodies
will be used, and the dynamics predicted by these models
of the body will be explored. Of particular interest
will be the dynamics of nonlinearly elastic rods and
strings. (SP) O’Reilly
290B. Topics in Continuum Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. The objective
of the course is to present a coherent and integrated
account of generalized continua with extensive
illustrative applications to diverse areas in fluid and solid
mechanics. The illustrative applications will be drawn
from such topics as liquid crystals, microcracking of
brittle materials, aspects of cell biology, fluid flow problems
(both inviscid and viscous flow) for free surface
flow in channels past an obstacle of any shape, motion
of jets of arbitrary cross-section, nonlinear deformation
of elastic rods and shells and flow in pipes, among others.
(SP) Staff
290C. Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Lectures on special topics which will be announced at
the beginning of each semester that the course is offered.
Topics may include transport and mixing, geophysical
fluid dynamics, biofluid dynamics, oceanography, free
surface flows, non-Newtonian fluid mechanics, among
other possibilities. (F,SP) Savas, Yeung
290D. Solid Modeling. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Computer Science 61B or equivalent,
linear algebra; Computer Science 184 recommended.
Graduate survey of solid modeling research.
Representations and algorithms for 3D solid geometry.
Applications in design, analysis, planning, and manufacturing
of mechanical parts, including CAD/CAM,
reverse engineering, meshing, feature recognition,
mold-making, and rapid prototyping. (SP) McMains
290G. Laser Processing and Diagnostics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing. Fundamentals of optical energy coupling with
materials. Lasers and beam delivery systems. Thermal
transport in irradiated targets: conductive heat transfer,
stress field, melting and solidification, surface vaporization,
explosive phase-change, plasma formation.
Ultra-fast (picosecond and femtosecond) laser processing.
Laser processing of thin films: continuous
wave laser annealing, pulsed laser annealing. Laserinduced
surface modification: mass transfer in shallow
doping, flow redistribution and topography generation,
miniature modification of glass surfaces. Desorption
at low-energy densities: time-of-flight spectrometry.
Dynamics of laser-ablated plumes: computational
modeling, probe beam deflection, emission and laserinduced
fluorescence spectroscopy. Processing of
polymers. Laser interaction with liquids. Laser cleaning.
Laser interactions with nanoparticles and clusters.
Advanced microfabrication applications. Laser-assisted
nano-structuring of surface properties. Optical measurement
of thermal properties. Laser-based sensors
and non-contact diagnostics. Offered alternate years.
(F) Grigoropoulos
290M. Expert Systems in Mechanical Engineering.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
107A, 102B or equivalent. Introduction to artificial intelligence
and decision analysis in mechanical engineering.
Fundamentals of analytic design, probability
theory, failure analysis, risk assessment, and Bayesian
and logical inference. Applications to expert systems
in probabilistic mechanical engineering design and failure
diagnostics. Use of automated influence diagrams
to codify expert knowledge and to evaluate optimal design
decisions. (SP) Agogino
290N. System Identification. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 232, Electrical Engineering and
Computer Sciences 221A or consent of instructor. This
course is intended to provide a comprehensive treatment
of both classical system identification and recent
work in control-oriented system identification. Numerical,
practical, and theoretical aspects will be covered.
Topics treated include time and frequency domain
methods, generalized parameter estimation, identification
of structured nonlinear systems, modeling uncertainty
bounding, and state-space methods. (F,SP)
Poolla
290P. New Product Development: Design Theory and
Methods. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing, consent of instructor. This
course is aimed at developing the interdisciplinary skills
required for successful product development in today’s
competitive marketplace. We expect students to be
disciplinary experts in their own field (e.g., engineering,
business). By bringing together multiple perspectives,
we will learn how product development teams can focus
their efforts to quickly create cost-effective products
that exceed customers’ expectations. (F) Agogino
290Q. Dynamic Control of Robotic Manipulators.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week for five weeks, one
hour of lecture per week for 10 weeks, four hours of
laboratory per week for full term. Prerequisites: 230,
232, or consent of instructor. Dynamic and kinematic
analysis of robotic manipulators. Sensors (position, velocity,
force and vision). Actuators and power transmission
lines. Direct drive and indirect drive. Point to
point control. Straight and curved path following. Industrial
practice in servo control. Applications of optimal
linear quadratic control, preview control, nonlinear control,
and direct/indirect adaptive controls. Force control
and compliance control. Collision avoidance. Utilization
of dynamic controls (SP) Horowitz, Kazerooni
290R. Topics in Manufacturing. (3) Course may be
repeated for credit as topic varies. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Advanced
topics in manufacturing research. Topics vary
from year to year. (F,SP) Dornfeld, McMains, Wright
C290S. Hybrid Systems and Intelligent Control. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Formerly 291E. Analysis
of hybrid systems formed by the interaction of continuous
time dynamics and discrete-event controllers.
Discrete-event systems models and language descriptions.
Finite-state machines and automata. Model
verification and control of hybrid systems. Signal-tosymbol
conversion and logic controllers. Adaptive, neural,
and fuzzy-control systems. Applications to robotics
and Intelligent Vehicle and Highway Systems (IVHS).
Also listed as Electrical Engineering C291E. Hedrick
290T. Plasmonic Materials. (3) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Physics 110A or consent of
instructor. This course deals with fundamental aspects
of plasmonic materials. The electromagnetic responses
of those artifically constructed materials will be discussed.
Physics of surface plasmons and dispersion
engineering will be introduced. Resonant phenomena
associated with the negative permittivity and permeability
and the left-handed propagation will be presented.
Methods of design, fabrication, and characterization
of plasmonic materials will be discussed.
(F,SP) Zhang
298. Group Studies, Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-8) Course may be repeated for credit. Sections 1-49
to be graded on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
Sections 50 and above to be graded on a letter-grade
basis. Advanced studies in various subjects through
special seminars on topics to be selected each year.
Informal group studies of special problems, group participation
in comprehensive design problems, or group
research on complete problems for analysis and experimentation.
(F,SP) Staff
C298A. Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (1,2) Course
may be repeated for credit. One hour of seminar per
week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Lectures on
special topics which will be announced at the beginning
of each semester that the course is offered. Topics
may include transport and mixing, geophysical fluid
dynamics, bio-fluid dynamics, oceanography, free surface
flows, non-Newtonian fluid mechanics, among
other possibilities. Also listed as Environ Sci, Policy,
and Management C291, Physics C290I, Mathematics
C290C, Chemical Engineering C295M, Nuclear Engineering
C290F, Civil and Environmental Engineering
C290K, and Bioengineering C290C. (F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Study or Research. (1-12) Course
may be repeated for credit. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in engineering, physics, or mathematics. Investigations
of advanced problems in mechanical engineering.
(F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral degree.
Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate standing. Individual
study in consultation with the major field adviser, intended
to provide an opportunity for qualified students
to prepare themselves for the various examinations required
of candidates for the Ph.D. (and other doctoral
degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
301. Teaching of Mechanical Engineering at the
University Level. (1-6) Course may be repeated for
credit. One hour of seminar per week. Must be taken
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Weekly seminars
and discussions on effective teaching methods. Educational
objectives. Theories of learning. The lecture and
alternative approaches. Use of media resources. Student
evaluation. Laboratory instruction. Curricula in mechanical
engineering. Practice teaching. This course is
open to Teaching Assistants of Mechanical Engineering.
(SP) Staff