Electrical Engineering
Lower Division Courses
1. EECS: The First Course. (2) One hour of lecture
and two hours of laboratory per week. Introduction to
engineering concepts and techniques in general, and
to forefront topics in electrical engineering and computer
sciences in particular, involving hands-on experimentation,
lectures, demonstrations, readings, and
practice with written and oral communication. Course
intended for first-year undergraduates. (F,SP) White
20N. Structure and Interpretation of Systems and
Signals. (4) Three hours of lecture and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B.
Mathematical modeling of signals and systems. Continous
and discrete signals, with applications to audio,
images, video, communications, and control. Statebased
models, beginning with automata and evolving
to LTI systems. Frequency domain models for signals
and frequency response for systems, and sampling of
continuous-time signals. A Matlab-based laboratory is
an integral part of the course. (F,SP) Lee
24. Freshman Seminar. (1) One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a letter-grade basis.
Sections 3-4 to be graded on a passed/not passed
basis. The Freshman Seminar Program has been designed
to provide new students with the opportunity to
explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a
small seminar setting. Freshman seminars are offered
in all campus departments, and topics may vary from
department to department and semester to semester.
(F,SP)
40. Introduction to Microelectronic Circuits. (4) Students
will receive no credit for 40 after taking 100.
Three hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory, and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
1B and Physics 7B. Fundamental circuit concepts
and analysis techniques in the context of digital
electronic circuits. Transient analysis of CMOS logic
gates; basic integrated-circuit technology and layout.
(F,SP) Staff
42. Introduction to Digital Electronics. (3) Two
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B. Electronic circuit elements,
theory, digital circuits applications. Digital signals,
logic gates, switching. Kirchoff’s laws, nodal analysis.
Graphical methods for nonlinear circuits.
Thevenin, Norton equivalents, transients. Dependent
source, amplifiers. Operational amplifiers and comparators.
MOS transistors as switches, MOS I-V models
for logic circuit analysis. Transfer curves. Symmetry
of PMOS and NMOS devices and CMOS circuits. Resistance
and capacitance models for stage delay.
(F,SP) Staff
43. Introductory Electronics Laboratory. (1) Two
hours of laboratory/discussion per week. Must be
taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: 42
(may be taken concurrently) or equivalent or consent
of instructor. Using and understanding electronics laboratory
equipment such as oscilloscope, power supplies,
function generator, multimeter, curve-tracer, and
RLC-meter. Includes a term project of constructing and
testing a robot or other appropriate electromechanical
device. (F,SP) Staff
84. Sophomore Seminar. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar
per week per unit for fifteen weeks. One and one half
hours of seminar per week per unit for 10 weeks. Two
hours of seminar per week per unit for eight weeks.
Three hours of seminar per week per unit for five
weeks. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a lettergrade
basis. Prerequisites: At discretion of instructor.
Sophomore seminars are small interactive courses offered
by faculty members in departments all across the
campus. Sophomore seminars offer opportunity for
close, regular intellectual contact between faculty
members and students in the crucial second year. The
topics vary from department to department and
semester to semester. Enrollment limited to 15 sophomores.
(F,SP)
Upper Division Courses
100. Electronic Techniques for Engineering. (4)
Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B, Physics 7B.
Analysis of passive circuits, sinusoidal steady-state response,
transient response, operational amplifiers, digital
building blocks, digital systems, microprocessor
control, power systems and machines. This course is
not for students majoring in Electrical Engineering.
(F,SP)
105. Microelectronic Devices and Circuits. (4) Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40. This
course covers the fundamental circuit and device concepts
needed to understand analog integrated circuits.
After an overview of the basic properties of semiconductors,
the p-n junction and MOS capacitors are described
and the MOSFET is modeled as a large-signal
device. Two port small-signal amplifiers and their realization
using single stage and multistage CMOS
building blocks are discussed. Sinusoidal steady-state
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 227
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
228 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
signals are introduced and the techniques of phasor
analysis are developed, including impedance and the
magnitude and phase response of linear circuits. The
frequency responses of single and multi-stage amplifiers
are analyzed. Differential amplifiers are introduced.
(F,SP) Howe, Spanos
113. Power Electronics. (4) Three hours of lecture
and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
105 or consent of instructor. Power conversion circuits
and techniques. Characterization and design of magnetic
devices including transformers, reactors, and
electromagnetic machinery. Characteristics of bipolar
and MOS power semiconductor devices. Applications
to motor control, switching power supplies, lighting,
power systems, and other areas as appropriate. (SP)
Staff
117. Electromagnetic Fields and Waves. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 40, Mathematics 53, 54, knowledge of
phasor analysis (e.g. as taught in 105). Formerly 117A117B.
Review of static electric and magnetic fields and
applications; Maxwell’s equations; transmission lines;
propagation and reflection of plane waves; introduction
to guided waves, microwave networks, and radiation
and antennas. Minilabs on statics, transmission lines,
and waves. (F,SP) Staff
118. Introduction to Optical Communication Systems
and Networks. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 20 and 40. Basic principles of digital
and analog optical communications and optical networks.
Emphasis is on principles of optical links, including
channel capacity, basic limitations due to noise
processes, and bit error rate requirements. Optical amplification,
the detector-receiver, optical fiber and freespace
propagation, the transmitter, and modulation
schemes. Coherent and incoherent communications
and network systems. Basic optical Fourier transform
signal processing techniques. (F) Gustafson
119. Introduction to Optical Engineering. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Physics 7C. Fundamental principles of
optical systems. Geometrical optics and aberration theory.
Stops and apertures, prisms, and mirrors. Diffraction
and interference. Optical materials and coatings.
Radiometry and photometry. Basic optical devices and
the human eye. The design of optical systems. Lasers,
fiber optics, and holography. (SP) Bokor
120. Signals and Systems. (4) Four hours of lecture
and one hour of recitation per week. Prerequisites:
20N, Mathematics 53, 54. Continuous and discretetime
transform analysis techniques with illustrative applications.
Linear and time-invariant systems, transfer
functions. Fourier series, Fourier transform, Laplace
and Z-transforms. Sampling and reconstruction. Solution
of differential and difference equations using
transforms. Frequency response, Bode plots, stability
analysis. Illustrated by analysis of communication systems
and feedback control systems. (F,SP) Fearing,
Kahn
120L. Signals and Systems Laboratory. (1) Three
hours of laboratory every other week. Prerequisites:
May be taken concurrently with 120. Hands-on experiments
designed to provide physical examples for
the theoretical concepts of 120. Time-and frequencydomain
examination of the response of linear systems
to periodic and transient signals, modulation and demodulation,
sampling, reconstruction and aliasing.
Representative applications include active filters, AM,
PM, feedback control, and digitized speech. (F,SP)
Fearing, Kahn
121. Introduction to Digital Communication Systems.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 120, 126. Introduction
to the basic principles of the design and analysis of
modern digital communication systems. Topics include
source coding, channel coding, baseband and passband
modulation techniques, receiver design, and
channel equalization. Applications to design of digital
telephone modems, compact disks, and digital wireless
communication systems. Concepts illustrated by a sequence
of MATLAB exercises. (SP) Tse
122. Introduction to Communication Networks. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Computer
Science 61B, Mathematics 53 or 54. This course
is an introduction to the design and implementation of
computer networks. We will focus on the concepts and
fundamental design principles that have contributed to
the Internet’s scalability and robustness and survey the
underlying technologies—e.g., Ethernet, 802.11, DSL,
optical links—that have led to the Internet’s phenomenal
success. Topics include layering, congestion/flow/error
control, routing, addressing, multicast,
packet scheduling, switching, internetworking, network
security, and networking/programming interfaces.
(F,SP) Stoica, Walrand
123. Digital Signal Processing. (4) Three hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion, and one hour of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 120. Discrete time signals
and systems: Fourier and Z transforms, DFT, 2-
dimensional versions. Digital signal processing topics:
flow graphs, realizations, FFT, chirp-Z algorithms,
Hilbert transform relations, quantization effects, linear
prediction. Digital filter design methods: windowing, frequency
sampling, S-to-Z methods, frequency-transformation
methods, optimization methods, 2-dimensional
filter design. (SP) Staff
C125. Introduction to Robotics. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
120 or equivalent, consent of instructor. An introduction
to the kinematics, dynamics, and control of
robot manipulators, robotic vision, sensing, and the
programming of robots. The course will cover forward,
inverse kinematics of serial chain manipulators. The
manipulator Jacobian, force relations, dynamics and
control-position, and force control. Trajectory generation,
collision avoidance, automatic planning of fine
and gross motion strategies, robot programming languages.
Proximity, tactile, and force sensing. Network
modeling, stability, and fidelity in teleoperation. Biological
analogies and medical applications of robotics.
Also listed as Bioengineering C125. (F,SP) Sastry,
Tendick
126. Probability and Random Processes. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 20. This course covers the fundamentals
of probability and random processes useful in
fields such as networks, communication, signal processing,
and control. Sample space, events, probability
law. Conditional probability. Independence. Random
variables. Distribution, density functions. Random vectors.
Law of large numbers. Central limit theorem. Estimation
and detection. Markov chains. (F,SP) Tse
128. Feedback Control. (4) Three hours of lecture
and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
120. Analysis and synthesis of continuous and sampled-data
linear feedback control systems. Advantages
of feedback. Design by root locus, frequency response,
and state space methods, with a comparison of techniques.
Case studies. (F) Sanders
129. Neural and Nonlinear Information Processing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 120
or consent of instructor. Principles of massively parallel
real-time computation, optimization, and information
processing via nonlinear dynamics and analog VLSI
neural networks, applications selected from image processing,
pattern recognition, feature extraction, motion
detection, data compression, secure communication,
bionic eye, auto waves, and Turing patterns. (SP)
Chua
130. Integrated-Circuit Devices. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
40 or 100. Overview of electronic properties of
semiconductor. Metal-semiconductor contacts, pn junctions,
bipolar transistors, and MOS field-effect transistors.
Properties that are significant to device operation
for integrated circuits. Silicon device fabrication
technology. (F,SP) Bokor, King
131. Semiconductor Electronics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week plus several one hour mini-laboratories.
Prerequisites: 130 (which may be taken concurrently).
Physics of solid-state electronics. Review of
quantum-mechanical principles, crystal structure, lattice
vibrations, band theory, electrons and holes, diffusion
and drift, recombination, high-field phenomena,
optical effects, device applications. Several one-hour
minilabs done in pairs with the aid of a Teaching Assistant.
(F) Gustafson
C133. Microfabrication Equipment Laboratory. (2)
One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 40 or 100, Mathematics 53 and
54, Physics 7B; an upper division course on microfabrication
technology or manufacturing is recommended
but not required (e.g., Chemical Engineering
179, Electrical Engineering 143, Mechanical Engineering
101, 122, Materials Science 111, 123, 125. Experiments
and simulations illustrating the fundamental
principles of equipment and measurement technology
for microelectronic and microelectromechanical fabrication
and manufacturing. The experiments involve investigation
and measurements of high vacuum systems,
plasma-assisted etching and film deposition,
high temperature silicon oxidation, photolithography,
spin coating, chemical-mechanical polishing, and electroplating.
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C123
and Materials Science and Engineering C133. (SP)
Staff
140. Linear Integrated Circuits. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
105. Single and multiple stage transistor amplifiers.
Operational amplifiers. Feedback amplifiers, 2-
port formulation, source, load, and feedback network
loading. Frequency response of cascaded amplifiers,
gain-bandwidth exchange, compensation, dominant
pole techniques, root locus. Supply and temperature
independent biasing and references. Selected applications
of analog circuits such as analog-to-digital converters,
switched capacitor filters, and comparators.
The laboratory builds on the concepts presented in the
lectures and provides hands-on design experience and
help with the use of computer aided design tools such
as SPICE. (F,SP) Broderson
141. Introduction to Digital Integrated Circuits. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40;
105 and 150 recommended. CMOS devices and deep
sub-micron manufacturing technology. CMOS inverters
and complex gates. Modeling of interconnect wires.
Optimization of designs with respect to a number of
metrics: cost, reliability, performance, and power dissipation.
Sequential circuits, timing considerations, and
clocking approaches. Design of large system blocks,
including arithmetic, interconnect, memories, and programmable
logic arrays. Introduction to design methodologies,
including hands-on experience. (F,SP) Rabaey
142. Integrated Circuits for Communications. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 120 and 140. Analysis and design
of electronic circuits for communication systems, with
an emphasis on integrated circuits for wireless communication
systems. Analysis of distortion in amplifiers
with application to radio receiver design. Power amplifier
design with application to wireless radio transmitters.
Class A, Class B, and Class C power
amplifiers. Radio-frequency mixers, oscillators, phaselocked
loops, modulators, and demodulators. (F)
Meyer
143. Microfabrication Technology. (4) Three hours
of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
40 and Physics 7B. Integrated circuit device
fabrication and surface micromachining technology.
Thermal oxidation, ion implantation, impurity diffusion,
film deposition, expitaxy, lithography, etching, contacts
and interconnections, and process integration issues.
Device design and mask layout, relation between
physical structure and electrical/mechanical performance.
MOS transistors and poly-Si surface microstructures
will be fabricated in the laboratory and
evaluated. (F,SP) Cheung, King
C145B. Image Processing and Reconstruction Tomography.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of
discussion per week. Prerequisites: 120; basic programming
ability in C or FORTRAN. Linear systems
and Fourier transforms in two and three dimensions.
Basic image processing. Theory and algorithms for image
reconstruction from projections. Physics of imag-
ing systems including magnetic resonance, X-ray tomography,
positron emission tomography, ultrasound,
and biomagnetic imaging. Data analysis including hypothesis
testing, parameter estimation by least
squares, and compartmental kinetic modelling. Field
trips to medical imaging laboratories. Also listed as Bioengineering
C165. (SP) Budinger
145L. Introductory Electronic Transducer Laboratory.
(3) Two hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 40. Laboratory exercises
exploring a variety of electronic transducers for
measuring physical quantities such as temperature,
force, displacement, sound, light, ionic potential; the
use of circuits for low-level differential amplification and
analog signal processing; and the use of microcomputers
for digital sampling and display. Lectures cover
principles explored in the laboratory exercises; construction,
response and signal to noise of electronic
transducers and actuators; and design of circuits for
sensing and controlling physical quantities. (F)
Derenzo
C145L. Introductory Electronic Transducers Laboratory.
(3) Two hours of lecture and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40. Laboratory exercises
exploring a variety of electronic transducers for
measuring physical quantities such as temperature,
force, displacement, sound, light, ionic potential; the
use of circuits for low-level differential amplification and
analog signal processing; and the use of microcomputers
for digital sampling and display. Lectures cover
principles explored in the laboratory exercises; construction,
response and signal to noise of electronic
transducers and actuators; and design of circuits for
sensing and controlling physical quantities. Also listed
as Bioengineering C145L. (F) Derenzo
145M. Introductory Microcomputer Interfacing Laboratory.
(3) Two hours of lecture and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40 and 60B. Laboratory
exercises constructing basic interfacing circuits
and writing 20-100 line C programs for data acquisition,
storage, analysis, display, and control. Use of the
IBM PC with microprogrammable digital counter/timer,
parallel I/O port, and analog I/O port. Circuit components
include anti-aliasing filters, the S/H amplifier, A/D
and D/A converters. Exercises include effects of aliasing
in periodic sampling, fast Fourier transforms of basic
waveforms, the use of the Hanning filter for leakage
reduction, Fourier analysis of the human voice, digital
filters, and control using Fourier deconvolution. Lectures
cover principles explored in the laboratory exercises
and design of microcomputer-based systems
for data acquisition, analysis, and control. (SP)
Derenzo
C145M. Introductory Microcomputer Interfacing
Laboratory. (3) Two hours of lecture and three hours
of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40, Computer
Science 61B or a working knowledge of ANSI C programming
or consent of instructor. Laboratory exercises
constructing basic interfacing circuits and writing
20-100 line C programs for data acquisition, storage,
analysis, display, and control. Use of the IBM PC with
microprogrammable digital counter/timer, parallel I/O
port. Circuit components include anti-aliasing filters, the
S/H amplifier, A/D and D/A converters. Exercises include
effects of aliasing in periodic sampling, fast
Fourier transforms of basic waveforms, the use of the
Hanning filter for leakage reduction, Fourier analysis of
the human voice, digital filters, and control using
Fourier deconvolution. Lectures cover principles explored
in the lab exercises and design of microcomputer-based
systems for data acquisitions, analysis
and control. Also listed as Bioengineering C145M. (F)
Derenzo
192. Mechatronic Design Laboratory. (4) One and
one-half hours of lecture and ten hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 120, Computer Science 61B
or 61C, 150 or equivalent. Design project course,
focusing on application of theoretical principles in
electrical engineering to control of a small-scale system,
such as a mobile robot. Small teams of students
will design and construct a mechatronic system incorporating
sensors, actuators, and intelligence. (SP)
Fearing
198. Directed Group Study for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit.
To vary with section. Must be taken on a passed/not
passed basis. Prerequisites: 2.0 GPA or better; 60
units completed. Group study of selected topics in
electrical engineering, usually relating to new developments.
(F,SP) Staff
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Enrollment
is restricted; see the Introduction to Courses and
Curricula section of this catalog. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Consent of instructor and major adviser.
Supervised independent study. Enrollment restrications
apply. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
C201. Strategic Computing and Communications
Technology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing in engineering, business
administration, information management and systems,
or consent of instructor. Factors strongly impacting the
success of new computing and communications products
and services (based on underlying technologies
such as electronics and software) in commercial applications.
Technology trends and limits, economics,
standardization, intellectual property, government policy,
and industrial organization. Strategies to manage
the design and marketing of successful products and
services. Also listed as Information Systems C224.
(F,SP) Messerschmitt, Varian
210. Applied Electromagnetic Theory. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 117, or
Physics 110A, 110B. Formerly 210A-210B. Advanced
treatment of classical electromagnetic theory with engineering
applications. Boundary value problems in
electrostatics. Applications of Maxwell’s Equations to
the study of waveguides, resonant cavities, optical fiber
guides, Gaussian optics, diffraction, scattering, and antennas.
(F) Welch
C213. Soft X-rays and Extreme Ultraviolet Radiation.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Physics 110, 137, and Mathematics 53, 54 or
equivalent. Formerly El Engineering 290G. This course
will explore modern developments in the physics and
applications of soft x-rays. It begins with a review of
electromagnetic radiation at short wavelengths including
dipole radiation, scattering and refractive index,
using a semi-classical atomic model. Subject matter
will include the generation of x-rays with laboratory
tubes, synchrotron radiation, laser-plasma sources, xray
lasers, and black body radiation. Concepts of spatial
and temporal coherence will be discussed. Also
listed as Applied Science and Technology C210. (SP)
Attwood
216. Antennas and Propagation. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 210 or consent of instructor.
Application of Maxwell’s Equations to the
study of antennas and the propagation of electromagnetic
waves. Basic concepts of antennas as devices
in communication systems. Analysis of wire antennas,
arrays of elements, horns, reflector and lens
systems, frequency independent antennas. The propagation
of waves over the earth and in inhomogeneous
and random media. Offered alternate years.
(SP) Staff
217. Microwave Circuits. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 117 and 140 or equivalent.
Techniques of analog circuit technology in the high-frequency
regime above 1 GHz. Transmission lines and
distributed circuit elements; S-parameter design of
high-frequency active circuits; computer-aided analysis
and design. Emphasis on design of planar high-frequency
integrated circuits employing CMOS and SiGe
technology. Circuit building blocks for broadband wired
and wireless communication will be emphasized including
oscillators, low-noise amplifiers, and power amplifiers.
Offered alternate years. (SP) Niknejad
219A. Computer-Aided Verification of Electronic
Circuits and Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor; a course in
linear algebra and on circuits is very useful. Formerly
219. This course describes the computer algorithms,
techniques, and theory used in the simulation of electrical
circuits and systems. This course is concerned
with techniques for the verification of correct behavior
of complex electronic circuits and systems including
detailed simulation of integrated circuits at the transistor
level in the time and frequency domain, discreteevent
logic simulation, cycle-based logic simulation,
RTL and behavorial simulation, equivalence checking,
timing analysis, power estimation. (F) Sangiovanni-Vincentelli
219B. Logic Synthesis for Hardware Systems. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. The course
is concerned with the efficient representation and manipulation
of logic functions in the computer and how
this is applied to the analysis and synthesis of both
combinational and sequential logic. Brayton
219C. Computer-Aided Verification. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 219B and Computer
Science 172 or consent of instructor. Introduction to
the theory and practice of formal methods for the design
and analysis of concurrent and embedded systems.
Focus on algorithmic techniques for checking
logical and timing properties of circuits and communication
protocols. Topics include the semantics of reactive
systems, temporal logic model checking, the
theory of omega automata, state space reduction techniques,
compositional and hierarchical reasoning, real
time. Offered alternate years. (F,SP) Henzinger
220. Nonlinear Circuits. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 104. Algebraic and dynamic nports.
Potential and state functions. Volterra series.
Frequency-power formulas. Qualitative properties:
equilibrium states, stability, oscillations, subharmonic,
almost-periodic, and chaotic phenomenon. Frequency
entrainment. Harmonic balance, describing function
and bifurcation. Applications to oscillators, multivibrators,
mixers, modulators and harmonic generators.
Offered alternate years. (SP) Chua
221A. Linear System Theory. (4) Three hours of lecture
and two hours of recitation per week. Prerequisites:
120; Mathematics 110 recommended. Basic system
concepts; state-space and I/O representation.
Properties of linear systems. Controllability, observability,
minimality, state and output-feedback. Stability.
Observers. Characteristic polynomial. Nyquist test.
(F,SP) Staff
222. Nonlinear Systems—Analysis, Stability and
Control. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
221A (may be taken concurrently). Basic
graduate course in non-linear systems. Second Order
systems. Numerical solution methods, the describing
function method, linearization. Stability-direct and indirect
methods of Lyapunov. Applications to the Lure
problem-Popov, circle criterion. Input-Output stability.
Additional topics include: bifurcations of dynamical systems,
introduction to the “geometric” theory of control
for nonlinear systems, passivity concepts and dissipative
dynamical systems. (SP) Sastry
223. Stochastic Systems: Estimation and Control.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
226A (which students are encouraged to take concurrently).
Parameter and state estimation. System
identification. Nonlinear filtering. Stochastic control.
Adaptive control. (SP) Staff
224A. Digital Communication. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 121 and 226A, or equivalent.
Formerly 224. Design of baseband and passband
digital communication systems. Characteristics
of channels. Modulation techniques, including PAM,
QAM, PSK, FSK, and spread spectrum. Optimal demodulation
techniques and their performance. Information-theoretic
concepts of entropy and channel capacity.
Block, convolutional, and trellis coding
techniques. Intersymbol interference and equalization
techniques. (SP) Staff
224B. Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
121, 226A, or equivalent. Introduction of the fundamentals
of wireless communication. Modeling of the
wireless multipath fading channel and its basic physical
parameters. Coherent and noncoherent reception.
Diversity techniques over time, frequency, and space.
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 229
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
230 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Spread spectrum communication. Multiple access and
interference management in wireless networks. Frequency
re-use, sectorization. Multiple access techniques:
TDMA, CDMA, OFDM. Capacity of wireless
channels. Opportunistic communication. Multiple antenna
systems: spatial multiplexing, space-time codes.
Examples from existing wireless standards. (SP) Tse
225A. Digital Signal Processing. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 123 and 126 or solid
background in stochastic processes. Advanced techniques
in signal processing. Stochastic signal processing,
parametric statistical signal models, and adaptive
filterings. Application to spectral estimation, speech
and audio coding, adaptive equalization, noise cancellation,
echo cancellation, and linear prediction. (SP)
Ramchandran
225B. Digital Image Processing. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 123. 2-D sequences
and systems, separable systems, projection slice thm,
reconstruction from projections and partial Fourier information,
Z transform, different equations, recursive
computability, 2D DFT and FFT, 2D FIR filter design;
human eye, perception, psychophysical vision properties,
photometry and colorimetry, optics and image
systems; image enhancement, image restoration, geometrical
image modification, morphological image
processing, halftoning, edge detection, image compression:
scalar quantization, lossless coding, huffman
coding, arithmetic coding dictionary techniques, waveform
and transform coding DCT, KLT, Hadammard,
multiresolution coding pyramid, subband coding, Fractal
coding, vector quantization, motion estimation and
compensation, standards: JPEG, MPEG, H.xxx, preand
post-processing, scalable image and video coding,
image and video communication over noisy channels.
(F,SP) Zakhor
225C. VLSI Signal Processing. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 141, 123. Formerly
290M. Design of signal processing systems. Building
blocks and design styles. Simulation and specification.
Architectural trade-offs. Synthesis techniques. (SP)
Broderson, Rabaey
225D. Audio Signal Processing in Humans and Machines.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
123 or equivalent; Statistics 200A or equivalent;
or graduate standing and consent of instructor. Introduction
to relevant signal processing and basics of pattern
recognition. Introduction to coding, synthesis, and
recognition. Models of speech and music production
and perception. Signal processing for speech analysis.
Pitch perception and auditory spectral analysis with
applications to speech and music. Vocoders and music
synthesizers. Statistical speech recognition, including
introduction to Hidden Markov Model and Neural
Network approaches. (SP) Broderson, Morgan
226A. Random Processes in Systems. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 120 and Statistics 200A or equivalent.
Formerly 226. Probability, random variables and their
convergence, random processes. Filtering of wide
sense stationary processes, spectral density, Wiener
and Kalman filters. Markov processes and Markov
chains. Gaussian, birth and death, poisson and shot
noise processes. Elementary queueing analysis. Detection
of signals in Gaussian and shot noise, elementary
parameter estimation. (F) Anantharam,
Varaiya
227A. Introduction to Convex Optimization. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Convex optimization
is a class of nonlinear optimization problems where the
objective to be minimized, and the constraints, are both
convex. Contrarily to the more classical linear programming
framework, convex programs often go unrecognized,
and this is a pity since a large class of
convex optimization problems can now be efficiently
solved. In addition, it is possible to address hard, nonconvex
problems (such as “combinatorial optimization”
problems) using convex approximations that are more
efficient than classical linear ones. The 3-unit course
covers some convex optimization theory and algorithms,
and describes various applications arising in
engineering design, modelling and estimation, finance,
and operations resesrch. (F) El-Ghaoui
227B. Convex Optimization and Approximation. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 227A
or consent of instructor. Convex optimization as a systematic
approximation tool for hard decision problems.
Approximations of combinatorial optimization problems,
of stochastic programming problems, of robust optimization
problems (i.e., with optimization problems with
unknown but bounded data), of optimal control problems.
Quality estimates of the resulting approximation.
Applications in robust engineering design, statistics,
control, finance, data mining, operations research. (F)
El-Ghaoui
228A. High Speed Communications Networks. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122,
226A (may be taken concurrently). Descriptions, models,
and approaches to the design and management of
networks. Optical transmission and switching technologies
are described and analyzed using deterministic,
stochastic, and simulation models. FDDI, DQDB,
SMDS, Frame Relay, ATM, networks, and SONET.
Applications demanding high-speed communication.
(F) Varaiya, Walrand
228B. Communication Networks. (2) Two hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122 and 226A, or
equivalent. Formerly 228. Principles of design and
analysis of communications networks. Circuit, packet,
and hybrid switching approaches. Protocols, including
setup, routing, flow control error recovery. M/M/1 and
M/G/1 queuing theory and its application to analysis of
networks, including delay and blocking. (SP) Varaiya,
Walrand
229. Information Theory and Coding. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 226 recommended,
Statistics 200A or equivalent. Formerly EECS
229B Fundamental bounds of Shannon theory and
their application. Source and channel coding theorems.
Galois field theory, algebraic error-correction codes.
Private and public-key cryptographic systems. Offered
alternate years. (SP) Anantharam
229A. Information Theory and Coding. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 226 recommended,
Statistics 200A or equivalent. Formerly 229.
Fundamental bounds of Shannon theory and their application.
Source and channel coding theorems. Galois
field theory, algebraic error-correction codes. Private
and public-key cryptographic systems. Offered alternate
years. (SP) Anantharam
229B. Error Control Coding. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 126 or equivalent (some
familiarity with basic probability). Prior exposure to information
theory not necessary. Error control codes are
an integral part of most communication and recording
systems where they are primarily used to provide resiliency
to noise. In this course, we will cover the basics
of error control coding for reliable digital transmission
and storage. We will discuss the major classes
of codes that are important in practice, including Reed
Muller codes, cyclic codes, Reed Solomon codes, convolutional
codes, concatenated codes, turbo codes,
and low density parity check codes. The relevant background
material from finite field and polynomial algebra
will be developed as part of the course. Overview
of topics: binary linear block codes; Reed Muller codes;
Galois fields; linear block codes over a finite field;
cyclic codes; BCH and Reed Solomon codes; convolutional
codes and trellis based decoding, message
passing decoding algorithms; trellis based soft decision
decoding of block codes; turbo codes; low density parity
check codes. (SP) Anatharam
230. Solid State Electronics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 131; Physics 137B. Crystal
structure and symmetries. Energy-band theory. Cyclotron
resonance. Tensor effective mass. Statistics of
electronic state population. Recombination theory. Carrier
transport theory. Interface properties. Optical processes
and properties. (F) Bokor
231. Solid State Devices. (4) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
130 or equivalent. Physical principles and operational
characteristics of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is
on MOS field-effect transistors and their behaviors dictated
by present and probable future technologies.
Metal-oxide-semiconductor systems, short-channel
and high field effects, device modeling, and impact on
analog, digital circuits. (SP) King, Subramanian
232. Lightwave Devices. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 136 or equivalent; background
in semiconductor physics. Principle of semiconductor
lasers. Modulation dynamics. Single frequency lasers.
Fundamental AM and FM noise properties, linewidth.
Tunable semiconductor lasers. Quantum well lasers.
Electrooptic modulators and switches. Detectors. Integrated
optoelectronic circuits. Optical amplifiers-semiconductor
and Erbium fiber. Low coherence sourcessuperluminescent
diodes. Tunable optical filters. (F)
Lau, Smith
233. Lightwave Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 120 and 121 or equivalent;
136 recommended. Transmission properties of optical
fibers-dispersion, attenuation, nonlinear effects (solitons).
Direct-detection systems: analog and digital
modulation, transmitter design, receiver design, noise
properties of single and multimode fiber links, dependence
on source coherence, subcarrier and multichannel
CATV analog transmission issues the role of
optical fiber amplifiers. Coherent communication: FM
noise and modulation properties of laser diodes, quantum
limited detection, homodyne and heterodyne detection
of various formats, laser linewidth requirements,
diversity issues. Lightwave networks-WDMA, FDMA,
subcarrier, TDMA, and CDMA, relative merits. Topological
issues-multihop (sore-and-forward) and hotpotato
routing, the role of optical switching. Optical network
access protocols. Optical interconnection in high
speed circuit modules and computers. (SP) Kahn, Lau
236A. Quantum and Optical Electronics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 117A,
Physics 137A or equivalent. Interaction of radiation
with atomic and semiconductor systems, density matrix
treatment, semiclassical laser theory (Lamb’s),
laser resonators, specific laser systems, laser dynamics,
Q-switching and mode-locking, noise in lasers
and optical amplifiers. Nonlinear optics, phase-conjugation,
electrooptics, acoustooptics and magnetooptics,
coherent optics, stimulated Raman and Brillouin
scattering. Offered alternate years. (F,SP) Gustafson
238. Superconductive Devices and Circuits. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
117A,131; Physics 137A. Introduction to superconductivity.
Electron pairing. BCS and Ginzburg-Landau
theories. Single-particle and Josephson tunneling.
Electrodynamics of superconductors and Josephson
junctions. Proximity effect. Mixed state in type II superconductors.
Thin films. Applications in analog and
digital circuits. Fabrication technology. Van Duzer
C239. Partially Ionized Plasmas. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Upper division course
in electromagnetics or fluid dynamics. Formerly 239.
Introduction to partially ionized, chemically reactive
plasmas, including collisional processes, diffusion,
sources, sheaths, boundaries, and diagnostics. DC,
RF, and microwave discharges. Applications to
plasma-assisted materials processing and to plasma
wall interactions. Also listed as Applied Science and
Technology C239. Offered alternate years. (SP)
Lieberman, Neureuther
240. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuits. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 140.
Analysis and optimized design of monolithic operational
amplifiers and wide-band amplifiers; methods of
achieving wide-band amplification, gain-bandwidth
considerations; analysis of noise in integrated circuits
and low noise design. Precision passive elements,
analog switches, amplifiers and comparators, voltage
reference in NMOS and CMOS circuits, Serial, successive-approximation,
and parallel analog-to-digital
converters. Switched-capacitor and CCD filters. Applications
to codecs, modems. (F,SP) Boser
241. Advanced Digital Integrated Circuits. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 141. Analysis
and design of MOS and bipolar large-scale integrated
circuits at the circuit level. Fabrication processes,
device characteristics, parasitic effects static
and dynamic digital circuits for logic and memory func-
tions. Calculation of speed and power consumption
from layout and fabrication parameters. ROM, RAM,
EEPROM circuit design. Use of SPICE and other computer
aids. (SP) Nikolic, Rabaey
242. Advanced Integrated Circuits for Communications.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
142, 240. Analysis, evaluation and design
of present-day integrated circuits for communications
application, particularly those for which nonlinear response
must be included. MOS, bipolar and BICMOS
circuits, audio and video power amplifiers, optimum
performance of near-sinusoidal oscillators and frequency-translation
circuits. Phase-locked loop ICs,
analog multipliers and voltage-controlled oscillators;
advanced components for telecommunication circuits.
Use of new CAD tools and systems. (F) Meyer, Niknejad
243. Advanced IC Processing and Layout. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 143 and either
140 or 141. The key processes for the fabrication
of integrated circuits. Optical, X-ray, and e-beam lithography,
ion implantation, oxidation and diffusion. Thin
film deposition. Wet and dry etching and ion milling. Effect
of phase and defect equilibria on process control.
(SP) Staff
244. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 140
or 141. This course will cover a wide variety of topics
relating to the development of computer aids for integrated
circuit design. The course will emphasize stateof-the-art
techniques and both the theoretical basis for
the methods as well as the application of results to
practical problems, including details of implementation.
Topics to be covered include simulation, layout techniques,
synthesis, verification, testing, and integrated
design systems. (F) Keutzer
C245. Introduction to MEMS Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering or science;
undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Physics, fabrication, and design of micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS). Micro-and nano-fabrication
processes, including silicon surface and bulk micromachining
and non-silicon micromachining. Integration
strategies and assembly processes. Microsensor and
microactuator devices: electrostatic, piezoresistive,
piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic transduction. Electronic
position-sensing circuits and electrical and mechanical
noise. CAD for MEMS. Design project is required.
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C218.
(F,SP) Staff
C246. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS).
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor. This course
is aimed to provide basic understanding of integrated
circuit (IC) processes and microelectromechanical system
(MEMS). Technologies including analyses, design,
and manufacturing processes of MEMS will be introduced.
The first part of the course emphasizes IC processes
including thin film deposition, lithography, and
etching. The second part of the course deals with micromachining
processes including surface-, bulk-micromachining,
LIGA and other processes. Also listed
as Mechanical Engineering C219. (SP) Pisano
247. Analysis and Design of VLSI Analog-Digital Interface
Integrated Circuits. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 240. Architectural and circuit
level design and analysis of integrated analog-to-digital
and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS and BiCMOS
VLSI technology. Analog-digital converters, digital-analog
converters, sample/hold amplifiers,
continuous and switched-capacitor filters. RF integrated
electronics including synthesizers, LNA’s, and
baseband processing. Low power mixed signal design.
Data communications functions including clock recovery.
CAD tools for analog design including simulation
and synthesis. Boser
249. Embedded System Design: Models, Validation,
and Synthesis. (4) Four hours of lecture and two
hours of laboratory/discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Background in SoC design, operating systems and
compilers, or consent of instructor. Principles of embedded
system design. Focus on design methodologies
and foundations. Platform-based design and communication-based
design and their relationship with design
time, re-use, and performance. Models of
computation and their use in design capture, manipulation,
verification, and synthesis. Mapping into architecture
and system platforms. Performance estimation.
Scheduling and real-time requirements.
Synchronous languages and time-triggered protocols
to simplify the design process. Simulation techniques
for highly programmable platforms. Synthesis and successive
refinement: meta-model of computation. Use
of design tools and analysis of their capabilities and
limitations: Ptolemy, POLIS, Metropolis, VCC, Coware.
(F) Sangiovanni-Vincentelli
290. Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering.
Course may be repeated for credit. One to three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
The 290 courses cover current topics of research
interest in electrical engineering. The course
content may vary from semester to semester.
290A. Advanced Topics in Computer-Aided Design. (1-
3)
290B. Advanced Topics in Solid State Devices. (1-3)
290C. Advanced Topics in Circuit Design. (1-3)
290D. Advanced Topics in Semiconductor Technology.
(1-3)
290E. Advanced Topics in Electromagnetics and Plasmas.
(1-3)
290F. Advanced Topics in Photonics. (1-3)
290G. Advanced Topics in Mems, Microsensors, and
Microactuators. (1-3)
290H. Advanced Topics in Semiconductor Manufacturing.
(1-3)
290K. Advanced Topics in Optimization. (1-3)
290N. Advanced Topics in System Theory. (1-3)
290O. Advanced Topics in Control. (1-3)
290Q. Advanced Topics in Communication Networks.
(1-3)
290S. Advanced Topics in Communications and Information
Theory. (1-3)
290T. Advanced Topics in Signal Processing. (1-3)
290Y. Organic Materials in Electronics. (3) Prerequisites:
130; undergraduate general chemistry. Organic
materials are seeing increasing application in electronics
applications. This course will provide an
overview of the properties of the major classes of organic
materials with relevance to electronics. Students
will study the technology, physics, and chemistry of
their use in the three most rapidly growing major applications—energy
conversion/generation devices (fuel
cells and photovoltaics), organic light-emitting diodes,
and organic transistors. (F,SP) Subramanian
C291E. Hybrid Systems and Intelligent Control. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Formerly 291E. Analysis
of hybrid systems formed by the interaction of continuous
time dynamics and discrete-event controllers.
Discrete-event systems models and language descriptions.
Finite-state machines and automata. Model
verification and control of hybrid systems. Signal-tosymbol
conversion and logic controllers. Adaptive, neural,
and fuzzy-control systems. Applications to robotics
and Intelligent Vehicle and Highway Systems (IVHS).
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C290S. Hedrick
297. Field Studies in Electrical Engineering. (1-12)
Course may be repeated for credit. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Supervised experience in off-campus companies
relevant to specific aspects and applications of
electrical engineering. Written report required at the
end of the semester. (F,SP) Pister
298. Group Studies, Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit. One to four
hours of lectures per unit. Section 1-40 to be graded
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Sections 41-49
to be graded on a letter-grade basis. Advanced study
in various subjects through special seminars on topics
to be selected each year, informal group studies of
special problems, group participation in comprehensive
design problems, or group research on complete problems
for analysis and experimentation. (F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Research. (1-12) Course may be repeated
for credit. Independent, individual study or investigation.
Investigation of problems in electrical engineering.
(F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral degree.
Independent study, in consultation with faculty
member. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Individual study in consultation with the major
field adviser, intended to provide an opportunity for
qualified students to prepare themselves for the various
examinations required of candidates for the Ph.D.
(and other doctoral degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
301. Teaching Techniques for Electrical Engineering.
(1) One hour of seminar per week. Must be
taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing. Weekly seminars and discussions
of effective teaching techniques. Use of educational
objectives, alternative forms of instruction,
and special techniques for teaching key concepts and
techniques in electrical engineering. Student and selfevaluation.
Course is intended to orient new graduate
student instructors to teaching in the Electrical Engineering
department at Berkeley. (F) Staff
302. Designing Computer Science Education. (2)
Two hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Computer
Science 301 or two semesters of GSI experience.
Discussion, practice, and review of research
concerning issues relevant to the teaching of computer
science: curriculum and topic organization, presentation,
technology, grading, staff management. (SP)
Clancy
