Mechanical
Engineering
(College of Engineering)
Department Office: 6141 Etcheverry Hall, (510) 643-7013
http://www.me.berkeley.edu/
Chair: Albert Pisano, Ph.D.
Professors
Alice M. Agogino (Roscoe and Elizabeth Hughes Chair in
Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University.
Decision and expert systems
David M. Auslander (Associate Dean, Research and Student
Affairs), Sc.D. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Dynamic systems, automatic controls
†Stanley A. Berger, Ph.D. Brown University. Fluid
mechanics
David B. Bogy (William S. Floyd, Jr., Distinguished Professor
in Engineering), Ph.D. Brown University. Elasticity,
plasticity, computer mechanics
Van P. Carey, Ph.D. State University of New York-Buffalo.
Transport in multiphase systems, thermophysics of
phase-change processes
James Casey, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Continuum mechanics
Juh-Yuan Chen, Ph.D. Cornell University. Turbine
combustion, chemical kinetics, numerical simulation
Hari Dharan, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Composite materials
Robert W. Dibble, Ph.D. University of Wisconsin.
Combustion, gas dynamics
David A. Dornfeld (Associate Dean, Interdisciplinary
Studies), Ph.D. University of Wisconsin. Manufacturing
processes, robotics
Carlos Fernandez-Pello (Associate Dean, Graduate
Division), Ph.D. University of California at San Diego.
Combustion, heavy and condensed fuels
Michael Y. Frenklach, Ph.D. Hebrew University. Chemical
kinetics, combustion chemistry, chemical vapor deposition
Ralph Greif, Ph.D. Harvard University. Heat and mass transfer
Costas Grigoropoulos, Ph.D. Columbia University. Heat
transfer, laser materials processing
J. Karl Hedrick (James Marshall Wells Chair in Mechanical
Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University. Control systems,
transportation systems
Roberto Horowitz, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Automatic control systems design, robotics
Rogert T. Howe, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley. Microsensors and microactuators
George C. Johnson (Associate Dean, Special Programs), Ph.D. Stanford University. Ultrasonic stress evaluation
Homayoon Kazerooni, D.Sc. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Mechatronics, robotics
Tony Keaveny, Ph.D. Cornell University. Tissue engineering and biomechanics
Kyriakos Komvopoulos, Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Tribology, contact mechanics, mechanical
behavior of materials
*George Leitmann, Ph.D.
Dorian Liepmann (Lester John Lloyd and Lynne Dewar Lloyd
Distinguished Professor), Ph.D. University of California,
San Diego. Classical fluid dynamics, bio-fluid mechanics
†Dennis K. Lieu, D. Eng. University of California, Berkeley.
High-speed electromechanic devices
Liwei Lin, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley. NSFCareer
MEMS (microelectromechanical systems)
Fai Ma, Ph.D. California Institute of Technology. Vibration
and control
Arun Majumdar, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Nanoscale thermal and biomolecular engineering,
micromechanical systems
Alaa Mansour, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Structural reliability and safety, probabilistic dynamics of
marine structures, strength of ship and offshore
structures, development of design criteria
Philip Marcus, Ph.D. Princeton University. Computational
fluid dynamics
†Oliver M. O’Reilly, Ph.D. Cornell University. Nonlinear
dynamics with applications to continuum mechanics
Andrew Packard, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Automatic control systems, mechanical systems
Panayiotis Papadopoulos, Ph.D. University of California,
Berkeley. Computational mechanics, solid mechanics
Albert P. Pisano (Chair and FANUC Chair for Mechanical
Systems), Ph.D. Columbia University. Computer-aided
design, design optimization
†Kameshwar Poolla (Vice Chair, Graduate Study), Ph.D.
University of Florida at Gainesville. Dynamic systems,
automatic controls
Lisa A. Pruitt, Ph.D. Brown University. Tissue biomechanics, biomaterial science
Boris Rubinsky (Arnold and Barbara Silverman Distinguished
Professor in Bioengineering), Ph.D. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Heat, mass transfer,
cryopreservation
Omer Savas, Ph.D. California Institute of Technology.
Aerodynamics, boundary layers, combustion, rotating
flows, turbulence
*Robert F. Sawyer (Class of ’35 Professor of Energy), Ph.D.
Princeton University. Combustion, fossil and synthetic
fuels
Andrew J. Szeri, Ph.D. Cornell University. Fluid dynamics
and nonlinear dynamics
Masayoshi Tomizuka (Cheryl and John Neerhout, Jr.,
Distinguished Professor), Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Automatic control systems, robotics and
manufacturing systems
Benson Tongue, Ph.D. Princeton University. Chaotic
oscillations in dynamic systems
Kent S. Udell (Vice Chair, Undergraduate Program), Ph.D.
University of Utah. Heat transfer, environmental
remediation, engineering ethics
Paul K. Wright (Associate Dean, Distance Learning and
Instructional Technology, Co-Director, Management of
Technology Program and A. Martin Berlin Professor of
Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. University of Birmingham.
Manufacturing processes, automation
Ronald W. Yeung, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Hydromechanics, numerical modeling, surface waves,
ocean space systems
Cyril P. Atkinson, M.S.M.E. (Emeritus)
Gilles M. Corcos, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Don M. Cunningham, M.S. (Emeritus)
Iain Finnie, D.Sc., Sc.D. (The Fife Professor Emeritus)
Joseph Frisch, M.S. (Emeritus)
Frank E. Hauser, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Maurice Holt, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Chieh S. Hsu, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Franklin C. Hurlbut, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
†Clayton D. Mote, Jr., Ph.D. (FANUC Professor of
Mechanical Systems Emeritus)
Antoni K. Oppenheim, Ph.D, D.Sc. (Emeritus)
Patrick J. Pagni, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Charles W. Radcliffe, M.S., M.E. (Emeritus)
Samuel A. Schaaf, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Frederick S. Sherman, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Erich G. Thomsen, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
George J. Trezek, Ph.D. (Emeritus)
Associate Professors
Stephen Morris, Ph.D. Johns Hopkins University.
Geophysical fluid dynamics
David J. Steigmann, Ph.D. Brown University. Continuum
mechanics, solid mechanics, shell theory,
electrodynamics
Xiang Zhang, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Nanofabrication and processing in mechanical
engineering
Tarek I. Zohdi, Habilitation Degree, University of Hanover,
Germany. Ph.D. University of Texas, Austin.
Computational mechanics
Assistant Professors
Sara McMains, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Computer graphics and geometric modeling
Lydia L. Sohn, Ph.D. Harvard University. Integrated
microfluidic devices for biological sensing
Adjunct Professor
Klaus Weinmann, Ph.D.
Overview
Mechanical engineers contribute to society by solving
problems in transportation, energy, the environment,
and human health. The mechanical engineer
needs a thorough preparation in
mathematics, physics, chemistry, manufacturing
processes, properties of materials, mechanics, fluid
mechanics, thermodynamics, as well as intensive
design and laboratory experience. The program of
study includes basic subjects common to all engineering
fields, fundamental subjects important to all
mechanical engineers and specialization in one or
more phases of mechanical engineering.
The undergraduate program begins at the freshman
level with study in the humanities, mathematics,
basic sciences, and the foundation design
course, Engineering 28. In subsequent years students
learn to use engineering science concepts as
tools for systems analysis and design. The design
and laboratory experience is a major component of
the senior year. Students have the opportunity to
develop a broad hands-on understanding of the design
process involved in significant engineering
systems. Undergraduate specialization is provided
in the choice of technical electives which may be
selected from the subject areas of applied mechanics,
automatic controls, electro-mechanical
systems analysis, energy conversion, fluid mechanics,
heat and mass transfer, manufacturing,
materials processing, mechanical design, ocean
engineering, nuclear engineering, thermodynamics,
biomedical, and environmental engineering.
Because of the widening range of technical problems
and the limited amount of specialization available
in the undergraduate curriculum, qualified students
should consider graduate study to expand
their scientific and technological capability. Further
details on undergraduate and graduate fields of
emphasis in mechanical engineering are available
in the Announcement of the College of Engineering.
The department also makes available a
brochure detailing the undergraduate and graduate
programs in mechanical engineering.
The B.S. program is accredited in mechanical engineering
by the Engineering Accreditation Commission
of the Accreditation Board for Engineering
and Technology, 111 Market Place, Suite 1050,
Baltimore, MD 21202-4012. Telephone: (410) 347-
7700.
Curriculum for the Bachelor’s
Degree
A total of 120 units is required, including:
Lower Division. Mathematics 1A-1B, 53 and 54;
Chemistry 1A; Physics 7A-7B-7C (Chemistry 1B or
Biology 1A may be taken for Physics 7C); Engineering
77, 28, 36, 45.
Upper Division. Mechanical Engineering 102B,
104, 105 or 105B, 106, 107A-107B, 109, C124;
Engineering 190; Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences 100; Civil Engineering 130.
Note: All students must complete (a) six courses
(five for double major students) of at least 3 units
each in humanities and social studies selected
from an approved list of courses (please see the
“Humantities and Social Studies” section of the Announcement
of the College of Engineering); (b) 12
units technical electives, at least 9 in upper division
elective mechanical engineering courses or upper
division engineering courses taught by mechanical
engineering faculty. Of these, 3 units must be in an
elective course selected from the following list: ME
101, 110, 119, 128, 130, 135, 142, 145, 161, 165.
The other technical elective units can be chosen
from courses in engineering, physical sciences,
mathematics, or statistics. No more than one lower
division course can be used to satisfy part of the
technical elective requirement. Lower division
courses acceptable for technical elective credit in
mechanical engineering: Astronomy 7; Biology 1A1B;
Chemistry 1B, 5; Engineering 50, 66; Civil Engineering
70; Molecular and Cell Biology 11, 32;
Statistics 20, 25, or any lower division course required
by another engineering major.
Mechanical Engineering Options. The following
groups of electives are presented to help undergraduates
focus their choices on specific professional
goals. Each group contains more courses
than can be taken within the standard allowance.
The electives need not be from any single group.
Controls. Mechanical Engineering 132, 133, 134,
135, 136, 175; Engineering 119, 177; Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences 120, 128.
Biomechanical Engineering. Biology 1A; Molecular
and Cell Biology 32L, 100, 110 130, 136; Integrative
Biology 100A, 124, 124L, 125, 125L, 131, 132,
135; Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
145A, 145B, 145L, 145M, 146; Mechanical
Engineering 133, 134, 135, 151, C176; Bioengineering
153, 210, 212, 213, 214.
Combustion. Chemical Engineering 140, 142; Civil
Engineering 111, 112, 168N; Engineering 117,
C150, 160; Mechanical Engineering 110, 140, 151;
Material Science Engineering 146, 148, 161.
Environmental. Engineering 117, 150, 151, 160,
161, 162, 191; Mechanical Engineering 110, 140,
142, 151, 173; Civil Engineering 119, 140; Nuclear
Engineering 162; Geography 144, 147; Architecture
149.
Fluid Mechanics and Aeronautics. Engineering
117, 118; Mechanical Engineering 133, 134, 150,
151, 161, 162, 163, 165, 173, 175, 185; Civil Engineering
131.
General Mechanical Engineering. Engineering 117,
119, 177; Mechanical Engineering 101, 110, 128,
132, 133, 145, 161, 173, 175.
Heat and Mass Transfer. Engineering 117, 119,
160, 177; Mechanical Engineering 140, 142, 145,
151.
Materials Processing and Manufacturing Management.
Engineering 102, 120; Mechanical Engineering
101, 110, 122, 127, 128, 133, 134, 151;
Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
115, 140, 170, 180; Business Administration 111.
Mechanical Engineering Design. Engineering 66,
119, 128, 166, 177, 191; Mechanical Engineering
101, 110, 119, 127, 130, 132, 133, 142, 145, 151,
161, 165, C176.
Mechatronics. Electrical Engineering 104; Engineering
66, 119, 166, 177; Mechanical Engineering
101, 128, 130, 132, 133, 134, 135.
Nuclear Engineering. Nuclear Engineering 101,
102, 120, 150, 161; Mechanical Engineering 132,
134, 145, 151, 161, 173; Physics 137; Mathematics
120A-120B.
Ocean Engineering. Civil Engineering 120, 180;
Engineering 164, 165, 167; Mechanical Engineering
101, 127, 128, 134.
Robotics and Automation. Mechanical Engineering
101, 132, 134, 135, 170, 175; Electrical Engineering
125; Industrial Engineering 140, 170.
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics. Engineering
117, 118; Mechanical Engineering 132, 133, 134,
161, 162, 163, 170, 173, 175, 185, 280, 282; Mathematics
104.
Graduate Programs
Both master’s and doctoral programs are available.
The student may choose either a scientific emphasis
in particular areas or integrated studies
directed to professional objectives. Master of Science
and Ph.D. degrees are the relevant degrees
for the scientific emphasis, and Master of Engineering
and D.Eng. degrees for the professional
one. Specialization is offered in the following
mechanical engineering disciplines: (1) controls
and dynamics, (2) design, (3) fluids, (4) mechanics
and materials, and (5) thermal sciences. Specialization
is also offered in the following focus areas:
(1) bioengineering, (2) manufacturing, (3) microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) and nanoengineering,
(4) computation, (5) mechatronics,
(6) transportation, (7) data storage, (8) energy and
environment, and (9) ocean engineering. Details
on various aspects of graduate study are available
at http://www.me.berkeley.edu, from departmental
brochures, and from the Announcement of the
College of Engineering.
Note: In addition to the courses listed below, the
Department of Mechanical Engineering offers the
following courses, found in the Engineering section
of this catalog: 28, Graphic Communication in Engineering;
117, Methods of Engineering Analysis;
118, Introduction to Scientific Computing; 128, Advanced
Engineering Design Graphics; 153, Introduction
to Bioengineering; 191, Engineering Ethics;
193, California Engineer Staff; 230A, Engineering
Analysis; 230B, Engineering Analysis; 231, Mathematical
Methods in Engineering; 266A, Finite Difference
Methods for Fluid Dynamics; 266B, Spectral
Methods for Fluid Dynamics.
Mechanical Engineering
Lower Division Courses
24. Freshman Seminars. (1) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-4 to be graded on a letter-grade basis.
Sections 5-8 to be graded on a passed/not passed
basis. The Berkeley Seminar Program has been designed
to provide new students with the opportunity to
explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a
small-seminar setting. Berkeley Seminars are offered
in all campus departments, and topics vary from department
to department and semester to semester.
(F,SP) Staff
39. Freshman/Sophomore Seminar. Course may be
repeated for credit as topic varies. Sections 1-2 to be
graded on a letter-grade basis. Sections 3-4 to be
graded on a passed/not passed basis. Freshman and
sophomore seminars offer lower division students the
opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member and a group of peers in a small-seminar
setting. These seminars are offered in all campus departments;
topics vary from department to department
and from semester to semester. (F,SP) Staff
84. Sophomore Seminar. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar
per week per unit for fifteen weeks. One and one half
hours of seminar per week per unit for 10 weeks. Two
hours of seminar per week per unit for eight weeks.
Three hours of seminar per week per unit for five
weeks. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a lettergrade
basis. Prerequisites: At discretion of instructor.
Sophomore seminars are small interactive courses offered
by faculty members in departments all across the
campus. Sophomore seminars offer opportunity for
close, regular intellectual contact between faculty
members and students in the crucial second year. The
topics vary from department to department and
semester to semester. Enrollment limited to 15 sophomores.
(F,SP) Staff
92. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering. (1)
One hour of lecture per week. Must be taken on a
passed/not passed basis. An outline of the field of mechanical
engineering designed to acquaint the entering
student with the profession and the activities of the
Department. (F) Staff
98. Supervised Independent Group Studies. (1-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Hours to be arranged.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Organized group
study on various topics under the sponsorship and direction
of a member of the Mechanical Engineering
faculty. (F,SP) Staff
Mechanical Engineering / 347
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
348 / Mechanical Engineering
Upper Division Courses
101. High Mix/Low Volume Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: C124
or consent of instructor. Fundamentals of high mix/low
volume (HMLV) manufacturing systems including manufacturing
fundamentals, unit operations and manufacturing
line considerations for work in process (WIP),
manufacturing lead time (MLT), economics, qualify
monitoring; HMLV systems fundamentals including just
in time (JIT), kanban, buffers and line balancing; class
project/case studies for design of competitive manufacturing
systems. (F) Dornfeld, McMains
102B. Mechanical Engineering Design. (3) Two
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: C124 and Engineering 28. Application
of principles of mechanics, material science,
and manufacturing processes to the design of components
and complete machines that must meet prescribed
functional requirements. Synthesis and analysis
of a major machine design project. (F,SP) Staff
104. Engineering Mechanics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Engineering 36, 77, and Mathematics 54. This
course is an introduction to the dynamics of particles
and rigid bodies. The material, based on a Newtonian
formulation of the governing equations, is illustrated
with numerous examples ranging from one-dimensional
motion of a single particle to planar motions of
rigid bodies and systems of rigid bodies. (F,SP) Staff
105. Thermodynamics. (3) Students will receive no
credit for 105 after taking 105B. Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A, Mathematics 53, Physics 7A, and Engineering
77. This course introduces the basic principles
of thermodynamics which are then aplied to various
areas of engineering related to energy conversion
and air conditioning. (F,SP) Staff
C105B. Thermodynamics and Biothermodynamics.
(3) Students will receive no credit for C105B after taking
105. Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Chemistry 1A, Mathematics
53, Physics 7A, and Engineering 77, or
equivalents. This course introduces the basic principles
of thermodynamics and their application to a variety of
biological processes and systems. Some coverage of
conventional engineering applications is also included.
Also listed as Bioengineering C105B. (F,SP) Carey
106. Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 104.
This course introduces the fundamentals and techniques
of fluid mechanics with the aim of describing
and controlling engineering flows. (F,SP) Staff
107A. Experimentation and Measurement. (3) Three
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 104, 105, 106, Electrical Engineering
100, Engineering 190. Co-requisite 109. Methods
and procedures for experimental investigation of
mechanical engineering phenomena and systems. Experimental
design, measurement systems, data acquisition,
and data analysis. Modeling of measurement
and experimental systems. (F,SP) Staff
107B. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. (3) Six
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 107A. Experimental
investigation of engineering systems and of
phenomena of interest to mechanical engineers. Design
and planning of experiments. Analysis of data and
reporting of experimental results. (F,SP) Staff
109. Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 105
and 106. This course covers transport processes of
mass, momentum, and energy from a macroscopic
view with emphasis both on understanding why matter
behaves as it does and on developing practical
problem solving skills. The course is divided into four
parts: introduction, conduction, convection, and radiation.
(F,SP) Staff
110. Introduction to Product Development. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 102B,
107A (which may be taken concurrently). The course
provides an experience in preliminary project planning
of complex and realistic mechanical engineering systems.
Design concepts and techniques are introduced,
and the student’s design ability is developed in a design
or feasibility study chosen to emphasize ingenuity
and provide wide coverage of engineering topics. Innovative
systems are preferred. Design optimization
and social, economic, and political implications are included.
Both individual and group oral presentations
are made, and participation in conferences is required.
Staff
C117. Structural Aspects of Biomaterials. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Biology 1A, Engineering 45, and Civil
Engineering 130. This course covers the mechanical
and structural aspects of biological tissues and their replacements.
Tissue structure and mechanical function
are addressed. Natural and synthetic load-bearing biomaterials
for clinical and medical applications are reviewed.
Biocompatibility of biomaterials and host response
to structural implants are examined.
Quantitative treatment of biomechanical issues and
constitutive relationships of tissues and biomaterials
are covered. Material selection for load-bearing applications
including reconstructive surgery, orthopedics,
dentistry, and cardiology. Mechanical design for
longevity including topics of fatigue, wear, and fracture.
Use of bioresorbable implants and hybrid materials. Directions
in tissue engineering. Also listed as Bioengineering
C117. (SP) Pruitt
118. Introduction to Nanotechnology and Nanoscience.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A and Physics 7B. This course
introduces Engineering students (Juniors and Seniors)
to the field of nanotechnology and nanoscience. The
course has two components: (1) Formal lectures. Students
receive a set of formal lectures introducing them
to the field of nanotechnology and nanoscience. The
material covered includes nanofabrication technology
(how one achieves the nanometer length scale, from
“bottom up” to “top down” technologies), the interdisciplinary
nature of nanotechnology and nanoscience
(including areas of chemistry, material science,
physics, and molecular biology), examples of nanoscience
phenomena (the crossover from bulk to quantum
mechanical properties), and applications (from integrated
circuits, quantum computing, MEMS, and
bioengineering). (2) Projects. Students are asked to
read and present a variety of current journal papers to
the class and lead a discussion on the various works.
(F,SP) Lin, Sohn
119. Introduction to MEMS (Microelectromechanical
Systems). (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 100, Physics 7B.
Fundamentals of microelectromechanical systems including
design, fabrication of microstructures; surfacemicromachining,
bulk-micromachining, LIGA, and other
micro machining processes; fabrication principles of integrated
circuit device and their applications for making
MEMS devices; high-aspect-ratio microstructures;
scaling issues in the micro scale (heat transfer, fluid
mechanics and solid mechanics); device design, analysis,
and mask layout. (F) Staff
122. Processing of Materials in Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: C124; Civil Engineering 130. Fundamentals
of manufacturing processes (metal forming,
metal cutting, welding, joining, and casting); selection
of metals, plastics and other materials relative to the
design and choice of manufacturing processes. (SP)
Weinmann
C123. Microfabrication Equipment Laboratory. (2)
One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 40 or 100,
Mathematics 53 and 54, Physics 7B; an upper division
course on microfabrication technology or manufacturing
is recommended but not required (e.g., Chemical
Engineering 179, Electrical Engineering 143, Mechanical
Engineering 101, 122, Material Science 111,
123, 125). Experiments and simulations illustrating the
fundamental principles of equipment and measurement
technology for microelectronic and microelectromechanical
fabrication and manufacturing. The experiments
involve investigation and measurements of high
vacuum systems, plasma-assisted etching and film deposition,
high temperature silicon oxidation, photolithography,
spin coating, chemical-mechanical polishing,
and electroplating. Also listed as Materials Science
and Engineering C133 and Electrical Engineering
C133. (SP) Staff
C124. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(3) Students will receive no credit after taking
102A or Materials Science and Engineering 113. Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 130 and Engineering
45. Formerly 102A and Materials Science and Engineering
113. This course covers elastic and plastic deformation
under static and dynamic loads. Prediction
and prevention of failure by yielding, fracture, fatigue,
wear, and environmental factors are addressed. Design
issues pertaining to materials selection for loadbearing
applications are discussed. Case studies of
engineering failures are presented. Topics include engineering
materials, structure-property relationships,
materials selection for design, mechanical behavior of
polymers and design of plastic components, complex
states of stress and strain, elastic deformation and
multiaxial loading, plastic deformation and yield criteria,
dislocation plasticity and strengthening mechanisms,
creep, effects of stress concentrations, fracture,
fatigue, and contact stresses. Also listed as Materials
Science and Engineering C113. (F,SP) Staff
127. Composite Materials—Analysis, Design, Manufacture.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Civil Engineering 130 or equivalent course
in mechanics of materials; Engineering 36 and 45.
Properties and microstructure of high-strength fiber
materials (glass, carbon, polymer, ceramic fibers) and
matrix materials (polymer, metal, ceramic, and carbon
matrices). Specific strength and stiffness of high-performance
composites. Rule of mixtures. Stress, strain
transformations. Elastic properties of a single orthotropic
ply. Laminated plate theory. Failure criteria.
Design of composite structures and components. Manufacturing
processes. (F) Dharan
128. Computer-Aided Mechanical Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 102B, Engineering 28, Civil Engineering
130, and Mathematics 53, 54, or consent of instructor.
Introduction to design (not drafting) via computers. Using
MATLAB software on X-windows workstations, the
student will be introduced to a variety of mechanical
design techniques and apply those techniques to the
design of beams, automobile engine components, planar
machine elements, linkages, and flexure hinges.
These techniques include ad-hoc methods, exhaustive
numeration, grid studies, and informal optimizations.
(SP) Lin
130. Design of Planar Machinery. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
104. Synthesis, analysis, and design of planar
machines. Kinematic structure, graphical, analytical,
and numerical analysis and synthesis. Linkages, cams,
reciprocating engines, gear trains, and flywheels. (SP)
Youssefi
132. Dynamic Systems and Feedback. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Math 53, 54, Physics 7A-7B. Physical
understanding of dynamics and feedback. Linear feedback
control of dynamic systems. Mathematical tools
for analysis and design. Stability. Modeling systems
with differential equations. Linearization. Solution to linear,
time-invariant differential equations. (SP) Staff
133. Mechanical Vibrations. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 104. An introduction to
the theory of mechanical vibrations including topics of
harmonic motion, resonance, transient and random excitation,
applications of Fourier analysis and convolution
methods. Multidegree of freedom discrete systems
including principal mode, principal coordinates and
Rayleigh’s principle. (SP) Tongue
134. Automatic Control Systems. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week, and three
hours of laboratory every other week. Prerequisites:
132. Linear control systems analysis and design in
transform domain and time domain. Transfer functions
and state equations. Frequency response and Nyquist
stability. Loop shaping. State feedback controller and
observer design. Applications to mechanical and
mechatronics systems. Computer control. (F,SP) Staff
135. Design of Microprocessor-Based Mechanical
Systems. (4) Three hours of lecture and three hours
of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering 77.
This course provides preparation for the conceptual
design and prototyping of mechanical systems that use
microprocessors to control machine activities, acquire
and analyze data, and interact with operators. The architecture
of microprocessors is related to problems in
mechanical systems through study of systems, including
electro-mechanical components, thermal components
and a variety of instruments. Laboratory exercises
lead through studies of different levels of
software. (SP) Auslander
140. Combustion Processes. (3) Two hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
105 and 106. 106 may be taken concurrently.
Fundamentals of combustion, flame structure, flame
speed,flammability, ignition, stirred reaction, kinetics
and nonequilibrium processes, pollutant formation. Application
to engines, energy production and fire safety.
(F) Fernandez-Pello
142. Thermal Environmental Control. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105 or equivalent;
106, 109 (may be taken concurrently). The
course will focus on analysis of thermodynamics and
transport phenomena associated with a broad spectrum
of thermal control applications. Emphasis will be
on application of theoretical concepts to the design of
advanced thermal control systems. Topics covered will
include enhanced vapor compression heat pumps, gas
compression cycles, psychrometrics, cooling towers,
dessicant cooling, absorption refrigeration, JouleThompson
cooling, cryogenics, thermoelectric cooling,
heat exchangers, heat pipes, and advanced insulation
concepts. Applications in thermal control of buildings,
automobiles, spacecraft, and electronics will be discussed.
(F) Staff
145. Computer-Aided Thermal Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one voluntary hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106, and 109 or consent
of instructor. This course introduces the use of modern
computational tools to model thermal performance
characteristics of components and systems. It emphasizes
the synthesis of thermoscience theory with
advanced computational methodologies to facilitate engineering
design of components and systems. The
course also will stress the use of computer graphics
tools to communicate design issues. Example applications
discussed in the course may include thermal
control of microelectronic components, solar energy
systems, combustion based power systems, cryogenics,
thermal control of vehicles. Students must
complete two applications-based projects that require
use of theoretical tools from the thermosciences together
with advanced computational methods developed
in class lectures. (SP) Staff
151. Advanced Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106 and 109. Basic
principles of heat transfer and their application. Subject
areas include steady-state and transient system analyses
for conduction, free and forced convection, boiling,
condensation and thermal radiation. (SP) Staff
161. Applied Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105 and 106. Operating
principles and characteristics of flow in conduits,
lubrication systems, pumps, turbines and compressors
will be described, and analyzed by application of concepts
of potential flow, laminar viscous flow and turbulent
flow. (F) Staff
163. Engineering Aerodynamics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106. Introduction to the
lift, drag, and moment of two-dimensional airfoils,
three-dimensional wings, and the complete airplane.
Calculations of the performance and stability of airplanes
in subsonic flight. (F) Savas
C164. Marine Statics and Structures. (3) Students
will receive 2 units of credit for 164 after taking 151.
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Civil
Engineering 130 or consent of instructor. Formerly Engineering
164. Terminology and definition of hull forms,
conditions of static equilibrium and stability of floating
submerged bodies. Effects of damage on stability.
Structural loads and response. Box girder theory.
Isotropic and orthotropic plate bending and buckling.
Also listed as Ocean Engineering C164. (F) Mansour
C165. Ocean-Environment Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: 106, Civil Engineering 100, or consent
of instructor. Ocean environment. Physical properties
and characteristics of the oceans. Global conservation
laws. Surface-wave generation. Gravity-wave mechanics.
Kinematics and dynamics. Design considerations
of ocean vehicles and systems. Model testing
techniques. Prediction of resistance and response in
waves-physical modeling and computer models. Also
listed as Ocean Engineering C165. (F) Yeung
167. Microscale Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106, 109, Physics
7B or equivalent. Phenomena of physical, technological,
and biological significance in flows of gases and
liquids at the microscale. The course begins with familiar
equations of Newtonian fluid mechanics, then
proceeds to the study of essentially 1-D flows in
confined geometries with the lubrication equations.
Next is a study of the flow of thin films spreading under
gravity or surface tension gradients. Lubrication theory
of compressible gases leads to consideration of air
bearings. Two-and 3-D flows are treated with Stokes’
equations. Less familiar physical phenomena of
significance and utility at the microscale are then considered:
intermolecular forces in liquids, slip, diffusion
and bubbles as active agents. A review of relevant aspects
of electricity and magnetism precedes a study of
electrowetting and electrokinetically driven liquid flows.
(F) Morris, Szeri
170. Engineering Mechanics III. (3) Students who
have taken 104 between Fall 1983 and Spring 1985
will receive no credit for 170. Two hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 104.
Newtonian Dynamics of a particle or system of particles
and of rigid bodies in three-dimensional motion.
(F) Staff
173. Fundamentals of Acoustics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104. Plane and spherical
sound waves. Sound intensity. Propagation in
tubes and horns. Resonators. Standing waves. Radiation
from oscillating surface. Reciprocity. Reverberation
and diffusion. Electro-acoustic loud speaker and
microphone problems. Environmental and architectural
acoustics. Noise measurement and control. Effects on
man. (SP) Staff
175. Intermediate Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
104 or equivalent. This course introduces and investigates
Lagrange’s equations of motion for particles
and rigid bodies. The subject matter is particularly relevant
to applications comprised of interconnected and
constrained discrete mechanical components. The material
is illustrated with numerous examples. These
range from one-dimensional motion of a single particle
to three-dimensional motions of rigid bodies and systems
of rigid bodies. (SP) Staff
C176. Orthopedic Biomechanics. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion/computer workshop
per week. Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 130. Students
will learn the application of engineering concepts
including statics, dynamics, optimization theory, composite
beam theory, beam-on-elastic foundation theory,
Hertz contact theory and materials behavior. Topics
will include forces and moments acting on human
joints; composition and mechanical behavior of orthopedic
biomaterials; design/analysis of artificial joint,
spine, and fracture fixation prostheses; musculoskeletal
tissues including bone, cartilage, tendon, ligament,
and muscle; osteoporosis and fracture-risk
predication of bones; and bone adaptation. Students
will be challenged in a MATLAB-based project to integrate
the course material in an attempt to gain insight
into contemporary design/analysis/problems. Also
listed as Bioengineering C119. (SP) Keaveny
C180. Engineering Analysis Using the Finite Element
Method. (3) Three hours of lecture and two
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering
77 or Computer Science 61A; Mathematics 53
and 54; senior status inengineering or applied science.
This is an introductory course on the finite element
method and is intended for seniors in engineering and
applied science disciplines. The course covers the basic
topics of finite element technology, including domain
discretization, polynomial interpolation, application
of boundary conditions, assembly of global arrays,
and solution of the resulting algebraic systems. Finite
element formulations for several important field equations
are introduced using both direct and integral approaches.
Particular emphasis is placed on computer
simulation and analysis of realistic engineering problems
from solid and fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and
electromagnetism. The course uses FEMLAB, a multiphysics
MATLAB-based finite element program that
possesses a wide array of modeling capabilities and is
ideally suited for instruction. Assignments will involve
both paper-and computer-based exercises. Computerbased
assignments will emphasize the practical aspects
of finite element model construction and analysis.
Also listed as Civil and Environmental Engineering
C133. (SP) Staff
185. Introduction to Continuum Mechanics. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Physics 7A; Mathematics 53, 54.
Kinematics of deformation, the concept of stress, conservation
of mass and balance of linear momentum,
angular momentum and energy. Mechanical constitutive
equations for ideal fluid, linear elastic solid. (F)
Staff
H194. Honors Undergraduate Research. (2-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: 3.3
or higher upper division technical GPA and consent of
instructor and adviser. Final report required. Students
who have completed a satisfactory number of advanced
courses may pursue original research under
the direction of one of the members of the staff. A
maximum of 3 units of H194 may be used to fulfill
technical elective requirements in the Mechanical Engineering
program (unlike 198 or 199, which do not
satisfy technical elective requirements). (F,SP) Staff
198. Directed Group Studies for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for
credit. One to four hours of directed group study per
week. Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Upper division standing and good academic
standing. Group study of a selected topic or topics
in Mechanical Engineering. Credit for 198 or 199
courses combined may not exceed 4 units in any single
term. See College for other restrictions. (F,SP) Staff
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Course
may be repeated for credit. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor and major adviser. Supervised
independent study. Enrollment restrictions apply;
see the introduction to Courses and Curricula
section of this catalog. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
210. Biological Control Systems. (3) One and onehalf
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing or permission
of instructor. Engineering analysis, especially application
of modern control theory, of complex biological
systems; dynamical engineering evaluation of anatomical-physiological
elements. Experimental methods applied
to biological control systems in the laboratory,
with specialized bioengineering transducers and online
digital computers. Digital simulation to interpret experimental
data and to elucidate design features of
these living systems. (F) Staff
C212. Heat and Mass Transport in Biomedical Engineering.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
106, 109. Formerly Mechanical Engineering
212. Fundamental processes of heat and mass
transport in biological systems; organic molecules,
cells, biological organs, whole animals. Derivation of
mathematical models and discussion of experimental
Mechanical Engineering / 349
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
350 / Mechanical Engineering
procedures. Applications to biomedical engineering.
Also listed as Bioengineering C212. (SP) Rubinsky
C213. Fluid Mechanics of Biological Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106 or
equivalent, or consent of instructor. Fluid mechanical
aspects of various physiological systems, the circulatory,
respiratory, and renal systems. Motion in large
and small blood vessels. Pulsatile and peristaltic flows.
Other biofluidmechanical flows: the ear, eye, etc. Instrumentation
for fluid measurements in biological systems
and for medical diagnosis and applications.
Artifical devices for replacement of organs and/or functions,
e.g. blood oxygenators, kidney dialysis machines,
artifical hearts/circulatory assist devices. Also
listed as Bioengineering C213. (F) Berger
C214. Advanced Tissue Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
C176, 185; graduate standing or consent of
instructor. Knowledge of MATLAB or equivalent. The
goal of this course is to provide a foundation for characterizing
and understanding the mechanical behavior
of load-bearing tissues. A variety of mechanics topics
will be introduced, including anisotropic elasticity
and failure, cellular solid theory, biphasic theory, and
quasi-linear viscoelasticity (QLV) theory. Building from
this theoretical basis, we will explore the constitutive
behavior of a wide variety of biological tissues. After
taking this course, students should have sufficient
background to independently study the mechanical behavior
of most biological tissues. Formal discussion
section will include a seminar series with external
speakers. Also listed as Bioengineering C214. (SP)
Staff
C218. Introduction to MEMS Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering or science;
undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Physics, fabrication, and design of micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS). Micro-and nano-fabrication
processes, including silicon surface and bulk micromachining
and non-silicon micromachining. Integration
strategies and assembly processes. Microsensor and
microactuator devices: electrostatic, piezoresistive,
piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic transduction. Electronic
position-sensing circuits and electrical and mechanical
noise. CAD for MEMS. Design project is required.
Also listed as Electrical Engineering C245.
(F,SP) Staff
C219. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS).
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor. Formerly
219. This course is aimed to provide basic understanding
of integrated circuit (IC) processes and microelectromechanical
system (MEMS). Technologies
including analyses, design, and manufacturing processes
of MEMS will be introduced. The first part of
the course emphasizes IC processes including thin film
deposition, lithography, and etching. The second part
of the course deals with micromachining processes including
surface-, bulk-micromachining, LIGA and other
processes. Also listed as Electrical Engineering C246.
(SP) Pisano
220. Precision Manufacturing. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 101, 102B, or consent of
instructor. Introduction to precision engineering for
manufacturing. Emphasis on design and performance
of precision machinery for manufacturing. Topics include
machine tool elements and structure, sources of
error (thermal, static, dynamic, process related), precision
machining processes and process models (diamond
turning and abrasive (fixed and free) processes),
sensors for process monitoring and control,
metrology, actuators, machine design case studies and
examples of precision component manufacture. (SP)
Dornfeld
221. High-Tech Product Design and Rapid Manufacturing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week enhanced
by a semester-long “hands-on” rapid prototyping
project. Prerequisites: 101; Recommended:
Basic metalprocessing, IC manufacturing; CAD, C, and
Java helpful. This is a “manufacturing survey course”
that deals with Internet-based design, rapid prototyping,
and a review of manufacturing processes relevant
to today’s production of consumer electronics or electro-mechanical
devices. It also aims to provide a balanced
view for the “Management of Technology”. (F)
Wright
222. Advanced Manufacturing Processes. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122 or consent
of instructor. This course presents an overview of
the theory of manufacturing processes, machine tool
design, and process issues in quality, production rate,
and flexibility of manufacturing. Nontraditional manufacturing
processes will be introduced. Topics covered
include overview of models of conventional manufacturing
(material removal, joining, forming, and deforming),
elements of machine tool error and machine
tool component design, nontraditional manufacturing
processes (laser, water jet, electrical discharge machining,
electo-chemical machining), rapid prototyping,
and process selection, optimization, and planning issues.
This course incorporates a laboratory term project
in the application of nontraditional manufacturing
processes. (SP) Weinmann
222B. Metal Cutting. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Metal cutting
and metal removal processes; theoretical underpinnings
of deformation behavior and material properties;
analysis and description of cutting tool materials;
forces, temperatures, and surface finishes generated
during chip formation. Analytical procedures, including
upper-bound technique, slip-line field solutions, finiteelement
methods and general computational tools.
Machinability of materials; modern trends in highspeed
machining and tooling. (SP) Staff
C223. Polymer Engineering. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Civil Engineering 130, Engineering 45. A survey
of the structure and mechanical properties of advanced
engineering polymers. Topics include rubber elasticity,
viscoelasticity, mechanical properties, yielding, deformation,
and fracture mechanisms of various classes
of polymers. The course will discuss degradation
schemes of polymers and long-term performance issues.
The class will include polymer applications in bioengineering
and medicine. Also listed as Bioengineering
C223. (F) Staff
224. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering
130; Engineering 45. This course covers
elastic and plastic deformation under static and dynamic
loads. Prediction and prevention of failure by
yielding, fracture, fatigue, creep, corrosion, and wear.
Basic elasticty and plasticity theories are discussed.
(SP) Dharan, Zohdi
C225. Deformation and Fracture of Engineering
Materials. (4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of
discussion per week. Prerequisites: Civil Engineering
130; Engineering 45. This course covers deformation
and fracture behavior of engineering materials for both
monotonic and cyclic loading conditions. Also listed as
Materials Science and Engineering C212. (SP) Zohdi
226. Tribology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 102B, 104, C124. Surface interactions.
Fundamentals of contact mechanics. Friction theories.
Types of measurement of wear. Response of materials
to surface tractions. Plastic deformation, void/crack
nucleation and crack propagation. Delamination wear.
Microstructural effects in wear processes. Mechanics
of layered media. Solid film and boundary liquid film lubrication.
Friction and wear of polymers and fiber-reinforced
polymeric composites. Brief introduction to
metal cutting and tool wear mechanisms. (SP)
Komvopoulos
227. Mechanical Behavior of Composite Materials.
(3) Students will receive no credit for 227 after taking
290J. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor. Formerly
290J. Response of composite materials (fiber and particulate-reinforced
materials) to static, cyclic, creep and
thermomechanical loading. Manufacturing process-induced
variability, and residual stresses. Fatigue behavior,fracture
mechanics and damage development.
Role of the reinforcement-matrix interface in mechanical
behavior. Environmental effects. Dimensional
stability and thermal fatigue. Application to polymer,
metal, ceramic, and carbon matrix composites. (SP)
Dharan
228. Computer-Aided, Optimal Mechanical Design.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing and the equivalent of both 102B
and 128. This course will cover the optimal mechanical
design of mechanical systems and components. A
variety of optimization techniques will be developed,
applied to mechanical design, and implemented on the
computer. (SP) Agogino, McMains
229. Design of Basic Electro-Mechanical Devices.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
EECS 100, graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental principles of magnetics, electro-magnetics,
and magnetic materials as applied to design
and operation of electro-mechanical devices. Type of
device to be used in a particular application and dimensions
of parts for the overall design will be discussed.
Typical applications covered will be linear and
rotary actuators, stepper motors, AC motors, and DC
brush and brushless motors. A design project is required.
(F,SP) Staff
230. Real-Time Applications of Mini and Micro
Computers. (4) Three hours of lecture and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in engineering or consent of instructor for advanced
undergraduates. Mini and micro computers,
operating in real time, have become ubiquitous components
in engineering systems. The purpose of this
course is to build competence in the engineering use
of such systems through lectures stressing small computer
structure, programming, and output/input operation,
and through laboratory work with mini and micro
computer systems. (F) Auslander
232. Advanced Control Systems I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
134 recommended. Input-output and state
space representation of linear continuous and discrete
time dynamic systems. Controllability, observability,
and stability. Modelling and identification. Design and
analysis of single and multi-variable feedback control
systems in transform and time domain. State observer.
Feedforward/preview control. Application to engineering
systems. (F) Tomizuka, Horowitz
233. Advanced Control Systems II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
232. Linear Quadratic Optimal Control,
Stochastic State Estimation, Linear Quadratic Gaussian
Problem, Loop Transfer Recovery, Adaptive Control
and Model Reference Adaptive Systems, Self Tuning
Regulators, Repetitive Control, Application to
engineering systems. (SP) Tomizuka, Horowitz
234. Multivariable Control System Design. (3) Students
may not take 234 for credit if they have taken
291C. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
232 or EECS 221A, as well as firm foundation in classical
control. Formerly 291C. Analysis and synthesis
techniques for multi-input (MIMO) control systems. Emphasis
is on the effect that model uncertainty has on
the design process. (SP) Packard, Poolla
235. Switching Control and Computer Interfacing.
(4) Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 230. Design and analysis of
control systems utilizing switching elements. Electronic
and microprocessor devices for sequential logic. Applications
to control of mechanical systems and control
computer interfacing. (SP) Auslander
237. Control of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 232. Fundamental properties of
nonlinear systems. Stability of nonlinear systems. Controller
Design via Lyapunov methods. Equivalent Linearization
methods including limit cycle prediction. (SP)
Hedrick
239. Advanced Design and Automation. (4) Three
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering
or science and one course in Control. This course will
provide students with a solid understanding of smart
products and the use of embedded microcomputers in
products and machines. The course has two components:
1.) Formal lectures. Students receive a set of
formal lectures on the design of smart machines and
products that use embedded microcomputers. the materials
cover machine components, actuators, sensors,
basic electronic devices, embedded microprocessor
systems and control, power transfer components, and
mechanism design. 2.) Projects. Students will design
and construct prototype products that use embedded
microcomputers. (F) Kazerooni
C240A. Advanced Marine Structures I. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing, Statistics 25 or equivalent. Formerly 240A.
This course introduces a probabilistic description of
ocean waves and wave loads acting on marine structures.
These topics are followed with discussion of
structural strength and reliability analysis. Also listed as
Ocean Engineering C240A. (F) Mansour
C240B. Advanced Marine Structures II. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing. Formerly 240B. This course is concerned
with the structural response of marine structures to environmental
loads. Overall response of the structure as
well as the behavior of its members under lateral and
compressive loads are discussed. Also listed as Ocean
Engineering C240B. (SP) Mansour
C241A. Marine Hydrodynamics I. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: C165 recommended
or graduate standing. Formerly 241A. Navier-Stokes
equations. Boundary-layer theory, laminar, and turbulent.
Frictional resistance. Boundary layer over water
surface. Separated flow modeling. Steady and unsteady
flow. Momentum theorems. Three-dimensional
water-wave theory. Formulation of wave resistance of
ships. Michell’s solution. Wave patterns. Applications.
Also listed as Ocean Engineering C241A. (F) Yeung
C241B. Marine Hydrodynamics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 260A or C241A recommended.
Formerly 241B. Momentum analysis for
bodies moving in a fluid. Added-mass theory. Matched
asymptotic slender-body theory. Small bodies in a current.
Theory of motion of floating bodies with and without
forward speed. Radiation and diffraction potentials.
Wave forces. Hydro-elasticity formulation. Memory effects
in time domain. Second-order effects. Impact hydrodynamics.
Also listed as Ocean Engineering
C241B. (SP) Yeung
C243. Advanced Methods in Free-Surface Flows.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
260A or C241B recommended. Formerly Naval Architecture
243. Analytical and numerical methods in
free-surface problems. Elements of inviscid external lifting
and non-lifting flows. Analytical solutions in special
coordinates systems. Integral-equation methods: formulations
and implementations. Multiple-bodies interaction
problems. Free-surface Green functions in
two and three dimensions. Hybrid integral-equation
methods. Finite-element formulations. Variational forms
in time-harmonic flows. Finite-difference forms, stability
and accuracy. Boundary-fitted coordinates methods.
Unsteady linearized wave-body interaction in time domain.
Nonlinear breaking waves calculations. Particle
dynamics. Extensive hands-on experience of micro
computers and/or workstations in developing solution.
Also listed as Ocean Engineering C243. (F,SP) Staff
248. Transport in Porous Media. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106, and 109.
Single and multiple phase transport in porous media.
Compressible and incompressible flow. Nondarcian
and real fluid flow. Heat and mass transfer in porous
media. Capillarity driven transport. Phase change phenomena.
(F) Udell
251. Heat Conduction. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 151; Engineering 230A. Analytical
and numerical methods for the determination of the
conduction of heat in solids. (F) Staff
252. Heat Convection. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 151, 265A; Engineering 230A.
The transport of heat in fluids in motion; free and
forced convection in laminar and turbulent flow over
surfaces and within ducts. (SP) Greif
253. Thermal Radiation. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 151. Thermal radiation properties
of gases, liquids, and solids; the calculation of radiant
energy transfer. (F) Grigoropoulos, Majumdar
254. Thermodynamics I. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 105. Axiomatic formulation of
macroscopic equilibrium thermodynamics. Quantum
mechanical description of atomic and molecular structure.
Statistical-mechanical evaluation of thermodynamic
properties of gases, liquids, and solids. Elementary
kinetic theory of gases and evaluation of
transport properties. (F) Carey
255. Energy Transfer in Gaseous and Condensed
Phases. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
254 or consent of instructor. Course introduces
statistical thermodynamics, kinetic theory, and
reaction theories, all at the level of microscopic energy
transfer processes, used for modeling of gaseous and
gas-surface reactive systems. (SP) Frenklach
256. Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 105, 106, and 109. Combustion
modelling. Multicomponent conservation equations
with reactions. Laminar and turbulent deflagrations.
Rankine-Hugoniot relations. Diffusion flames. Boundary
layer combustion, ignition, and stability. (SP) Dibble
257. Advanced Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 256. Critical analyses of
combustion phenomenon. Conservation relations applied
to reacting systems. Reactions are treated by
both asymptotic and numerical methods. Real hydrocarbon
kinetics are used; where available reduced kinetic
mechanics are introduced. Flame propagation
theory and experiments are discussed in detail for both
laminar and turbulent flows. (F) Staff
258. Heat Transfer with Phase Change. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 151. Heat
transfer associated with phase change processes.
Topics include thermodynamics of phase change,
evaporation, condensation, nucleation and bubble
growth, two phase flow, convective boiling and condensation,
melting and solidification. (SP) Carey
259. Microscale Thermophysics and Heat Transfer.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
151, 254, or consent of instructor. This course introduces
advanced statistical thermodynamics, nonequilibrium
thermodynamics, and kinetic theory concepts
used to analyze thermophysics of microscale systems
and explores applications in which microscale transport
plays an inportant role. (SP) Carey, Majumdar
260A. Advanced Fluid Mechanics I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
106; 185 (strongly recommended) or consent
of instructor. Introduces the foundations of fluid
mechanics. Exact flow solutions are used to develop
a physical insight of the fluid flow phenomena. Rigorous
derivation of the equations of motion. Incompressible
and compressible potential flows. Canonical
viscous flows. (F) Staff
260B. Advanced Fluid Mechanics II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
260A or consent of instructor. Develops a
working knowledge of fluid mechanics by identifying
the essential physical mechanism in complex canonical
flow problems which leads to simplified yet accurate
formulation. Boundary layers, creeping flows, rotational
flows, rotating flows. Stability and transition,
introduction to turbulence. (SP) Staff
262. Theory of Fluid Sheets and Fluid Jets. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185
and 106, or equivalents. Conservation laws in three dimensions
for inviscid and viscous fluids. Direct formulation
of non-linear theories for sheets and jets for
these fluids with surface tension and gravity. Application
to water waves, hydraulic jump, flow in waterfall,
planing of a boat. Capillary instability in a viscous jet.
(F) Marcus
263. Turbulence. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 260A-260B or equivalent. Physics of turbulence:
Summary of stability and transition. Description
of turbulence phenomena. Tools for studying
turbulence. Homogeneous turbulence, shear turbulence,
rotating turbulence. Summary of engineering
models. Discussion of recent advances. (SP) Savas
264. Waves in Fluids. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 261. Propagation of linear and
nonlinear waves in fluids. Wave interactions in gases
including reflections and diffraction. Shock dynamics.
Dispersion and dissipation analogy with surface water
waves. (F) Staff
267. Geophysical Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 265A or equivalent.
An introduction to the fluid mechanics and atmospheric
motions of the Earth’s interior (mantle and core). Buoyant
creeping flow. Rotation inside a sphere. Modes of
wave propagation in rotation and stratified flows. (F)
Staff
268. Physicochemical Hydrodynamics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: A first graduate
course in fluid mechanics sucs as 260A-260B.
Physicochemical hydrodyamics deals with the interaction
of fluid motion and physical, chemical, and biochemical
processes. The usual Navier-Stokes equations
of motion are supplemental with coupled
equations describing processes that are essential as
mass and momentum balances to the phenomenon of
interest. The class assumes a first graduate course ub
fluid mechanics, but provides the necessary physicochemical
background. Each section begins with a careful
discussion of physical issues to provide a contact
for subsequent modelling and analysis. Since the field
is broad, the emphasis here is on problems in which
short-range forces can be important: particle capture,
stability of colloidal suspensions and the mechanics of
thin films are therefore covered together with the necessary
hydrohynamic background. The aim is to introduce
physical problems not normally covered in
graduate classes in fluid mechanics, and to present the
models and methods used to illuminate them. (SP)
Morris
269. Magnetohydrodynamics and Materials Processing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
260A or consent of instructor. Magnetic
fields are used to control fluid motions in many types
of materials processing, ranging from the continuous
casting of steel and aluminum to the growth of single
semiconductor crystals. The flows are prone to instability,
the technical problem thus being to control the instability
by proper shaping of the applied field. This
course is an introduction to MHD, with applications to
processing. (SP) Morris
273. Oscillations in Linear Systems. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104 and 133. Response
of discrete and continuous dynamical systems,
damped and undamped, to harmonic and general
time-dependent loading. Convolution integrals and
Fourier and Laplace Transform methods. Lagrange’s
equations; Eigensolutions; Orthogonality; generalized
coordinates; nonreciprocal and degenerate systems;
Rayleigh quotient. (F) Ma
274. Random Oscillations of Mechanical Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104
and 133. Random variables and random processes.
Stationary, nonstationary, and ergodic proceses. Analysis
of linear and nonlinear, discrete and continuous,
mechanical systems under stationary and nonstationary
excitations. Vehicle dynamics. Applications to
failure analysis. Stochastic estimation and control and
their applications to vibratory systems. (SP) Ma
275. Advanced Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 175. Review of Lagrangian
dynamics. Legendre transform and Hamilton’s equations,
Cyclic coordinates, Canonical transformations,
Hamilton-Jacobi theory, integrability. Dynamics of
asymmetric systems. Approximation theory. Current
topics in analytical dynamics. (F) Staff
277. Oscillations in Nonlinear Systems. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 175. Oscillations
in nonlinear systems having one or two degrees
of freedom. Qualitative and quantitative methods:
graphical, iteration, perturbation, and asymptotic methods.
Self-excited oscillations, limit cycles, and domains
of attraction. (F,SP) Szeri
Mechanical Engineering / 351
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
352 / Mechanical Engineering
280A. Introduction to the Finite Element Method.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
or computer laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
50A-50B; some familiarity with elementary
field theories of solid/fluid mechancis and/or thermal
science. Formerly 280. Weighted-residual and variational
methods of approximation. Canonical construction
of finite element spaces. Formulation of element
and global state equations. Applications to linear
partial differential equations of interest in engineering
and applied science. (F) Papadopoulos, Zohdi
280B. Finite Element Methods in Nonlinear Continua.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
280A or equivalent; background in continuum
mechanics at the level of 185. A brief review of continuum
mechanics. Consistent linearization of kinematical
variables and balance laws. Incremental formulations
of the equations of motion. Solution of the
nonlinear field equations by Newton’s method and its
variants. General treatment of constraints. Applications
to nonlinear material and kinematical modeling on continua.
(SP) Papadopoulos
281. Methods of Tensor Calculus and Differential
Geometry. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 53, 54. Methods of tensor calculus
and classical differential geometry. The tensor
concept and the calculus of tensors, the RiemannChristoffel
tensor and its properties, Riemannian and
Euclidean spaces. Geometry of a surface, formulas of
Weingarten, and equations of Gauss and Codazzi. (F)
Staff
282. Theory of Elasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Fundamentals and general
theorems of the linear theory of elasticity (in three
dimensions) and the formulation of static and dynamic
boundary value problems. Application to torsion, flexure,
and two-dimensional problems of plane strain,
generalized plane stress, and bending of plates. Representation
of basic field equations in terms of displacement
potentials and stress functions. Some basic
three-dimensional solutions. (SP) Bogy, Steigmann
283. Wave Propagation in Elastic Media. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. Propagation
of mechanical disturbances in unbounded and
bounded media. Surface waves, wave reflection and
transmission at interfaces and boundaries. Stress
waves due to periodic and transient sources. Some
additional topics may vary with instructor. (F) Bogy
284. Nonlinear Theory of Elasticity. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281. Fundamentals
of nonlinear theory of elasticity. Exact solutions
in elastostatics by inverse and semi-inverse
methods. The method of successive approximations.
Small deformations superposed on finite deformations.
Nonlinear oscillations, shocks and acceleration waves,
progressive waves and standing waves of finite amplitude,
waves in pre-stressed solids. (F) Casey,
Steigmann
284B. Electrodynamics of Continuous Media. (3)
Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: A first course in continuum
mechanics (such as 185 or Civil Engineering 231.).
This course presents the fundamentals of electromagnetic
interactions in deformable continuous media.
It develops the background necessary to understand
various modern technologies involving MEMS devices,
sensors and actuators, plasmas, and a wide range of
additional phenomena. The emphasis of this course is
on fundamentals, beginning with Maxwell’s equations
in vacuum, the aether relations and their extension to
electromagnetic interactions in materials. The treatment
is general within the limits of nonrelativistic
physics and accommodates coupling with mechanical
and thermal effects. The topics discussed are all developed
at a general level including the effects of finite
deformations. Various linear models, which are especially
useful in applications, are developed through
specialization of general theory. This course will be of
interest to students in engineering, physics, and applied
mathematics. (F,SP) Steigmann
285. Foundations of the Theory of Continuous Media.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185. A general development of thermodynamics of deformable
media, entropy production, and related entropy
inequalities. Thermomechanical response of dissipative
media, including those for viscous fluids and
nonlinear elastic solids. A discussion of invariance, internal
constraints, material symmetry, and other special
topics. (F) Casey
286. Theory of Plasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Formulation of the theory
of plasticity relative to loading surfaces in both
strain space and stress space and associated loading
criteria. Nonlinear constitutive equations for finitely deformed
elastic-plastic materials. Discussion of strainhardening
and special cases. Applications. (F) Casey,
Papadopoulos
287. Multiscale Modeling and Design of New Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185 or equivalent, 280A or equivalent. This
course focuses on methods for the modeling, analysis,
numerical simulation, and design of microheterogeneous
materials, with a central theme being the determination
of relationships between the microstructure
and the acroscopic response or “macroscale property.”
The course is self-contained and is designed in an interdisciplinary
manner for graduate students in engineering,
applied mathematics, materials science, and
physics who are interested in methods to accelerate
the laboratory analysis and design of new materials.
Examples draw primarily from various mechanical, diffusive,
and thermal applications, although the techniques
developed apply to any partial differential system
possessing oscillatory coefficients. (SP) Zohdi
288. Theory of Elastic Stability. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 273. Dynamic
stability of elastic bodies. Small motion on finite deformation.
Classical treatments of buckling problems.
Snapthrough and other global stability problems. Stability
theory based upon nonlinear three-dimensional
theory of elasticity. (F) Steigmann
289. Theory of Shells. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281. A direct formulation
of a general theory of shells and plates based on the
concept of Cosserat (or Directed) surfaces. Nonlinear
constitutive equations for finitely deformed elastic
shells. Linear theory and a special nonlinear theory
with small strain accompanied by large or moderately
large rotation. Applications. (F,SP) Johnson,
Steigmann
290A. Nonlinear Dynamics of Continuous Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
175, 185. This course uses methods from dynamical
systems theory for the analysis of the nonlinear dynamics
of elastic bodies. Various methods for modeling
these bodies will be used, and the dynamics predicted
by these models of the body will be explored. Of
particular interest will be the dynamics of nonlinearly
elastic rods and strings. (SP) O’Reilly
290B. Topics in Continuum Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. The objective
of the course is to present a coherent and integrated
account of generalized continua with extensive
illustrative applications to diverse areas in fluid
and solid mechanics. The illustrative applications will
be drawn from such topics as liquid crystals, microcracking
of brittle materials, aspects of cell biology, fluid
flow problems (both inviscid and viscous flow) for free
surface flow in channels past an obstacle of any
shape, motion of jets of arbitrary cross-section, nonlinear
deformation of elastic rods and shells and flow
in pipes, among others. (SP) Staff
290C. Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Lectures on special topics which will be announced at
the beginning of each semester that the course is offered.
Topics may include transport and mixing, geophysical
fluid dynamics, biofluid dynamics, oceanography,
free surface flows, non-Newtonian fluid
mechanics, among other possibilities. (F,SP) Savas,
Yeung
290D. Solid Modeling. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Computer Science 61B or equivalent,
linear algebra; Computer Science 184 recommended.
Graduate survey of solid modeling research.
Representations and algorithms for 3D solid geometry.
Applications in design, analysis, planning, and manufacturing
of mechanical parts, including CAD/CAM,
reverse engineering, meshing, feature recognition,
mold-making, and rapid prototyping. (SP) McMains
290E. Chemical Kinetics in Reactive Flow. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 105, 106. Description
of detailed chemical kinetics in perfectlystirred
reactor, plug-flow reactor, transient well-stirred
reactor with multiple streams, shock tubes, one-dimensional
premixed flame, and one-dimensional opposed-jet
flame. Principles of solving stiff ordinary differential
equations. Numerical simulation and sensitivity
analysis. (SP) Chen
290F. Case Studies in Fire Safety Engineering Science.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
151, 105. The fundamental physics and chemistry
of fire are applied to case-study full-scale fires.
Emphasis is on modeling the detailed fluid mechanics,
heat transfer and combustion processes as they have
occurred in these examples. State of the art computer
analysis is stressed. (SP) Staff
290G. Laser Processing and Diagnostics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing. Fundamentals of optical energy coupling with
materials. Lasers and beam delivery systems. Thermal
transport in irradiated targets: conductive heat transfer,
stress field, melting and solidification, surface vaporization,
explosive phase-change, plasma formation.
Ultra-fast (picosecond and femtosecond) laser processing.
Laser processing of thin films: continuous
wave laser annealing, pulsed laser annealing. Laserinduced
surface modification: mass transfer in shallow
doping, flow redistribution and topography generation,
miniature modification of glass surfaces. Desorption at
low-energy densities: time-of-flight spectrometry. Dynamics
of laser-ablated plumes: computational modeling,
probe beam deflection, emission and laser-induced
fluorescence spectroscopy. Processing of
polymers. Laser interaction with liquids. Laser cleaning.
Laser interactions with nanoparticles and clusters.
Advanced microfabrication applications. Laser-assisted
nano-structuring of surface properties. Optical measurement
of thermal properties. Laser-based sensors
and non-contact diagnostics. Offered alternate years.
(F) Grigoropoulos
290M. Expert Systems in Mechanical Engineering.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
107A, 102B or equivalent. Introduction to artificial intelligence
and decision analysis in mechanical engineering.
Fundamentals of analytic design, probability
theory, failure analysis, risk assessment, and Bayesian
and logical inference. Applications to expert systems
in probabilistic mechanical engineering design and failure
diagnostics. Use of automated influence diagrams
to codify expert knowledge and to evaluate optimal design
decisions. (SP) Agogino
290N. System Identification. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 232, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences 221A or consent of instructor.
This course is intended to provide a
comprehensive treatment of both classical system
identification and recent work in control-oriented system
identification. Numerical, practical, and theoretical
aspects will be covered. Topics treated include time
and frequency domain methods, generalized parameter
estimation, identification of structured non-linear
systems, modeling uncertainty bounding, and statespace
methods. (F,SP) Poolla
290P. New Product Development: Design Theory
and Methods. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing, consent of instructor.
This course is aimed at developing the interdisciplinary
skills required for successful product development
in today’s competitive marketplace. We expect
students to be disciplinary experts in their own field
(e.g., engineering, business). By bringing together multiple
perspectives, we will learn how product development
teams can focus their efforts to quickly create
cost-effective products that exceed customers’ expectations.
(F) Agogino
290Q. Dynamic Control of Robotic Manipulators.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week for five weeks, one
hour of lecture per week for ten weeks, four hours of
laboratory per week for full term. Prerequisites: 230,
232, or consent of instructor. Dynamic and kinematic
analysis of robotic manipulators. Sensors (position, velocity,
force and vision). Actuators and power transmission
lines. Direct drive and indirect drive. Point to
point control. Straight and curved path following. Industrial
practice in servo control. Applications of optimal
linear quadratic control, preview control, nonlinear
control, and direct/indirect adaptive controls. Force
control and compliance control. Collision avoidance.
Utilization of dynamic controls (SP) Horowitz, Kazerooni
C290S. Hybrid Systems and Intelligent Control. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Formerly 291E. Analysis
of hybrid systems formed by the interaction of continuous
time dynamics and discrete-event controllers.
Discrete-event systems models and language descriptions.
Finite-state machines and automata. Model
verification and control of hybrid systems. Signal-tosymbol
conversion and logic controllers. Adaptive, neural,
and fuzzy-control systems. Applications to robotics
and Intelligent Vehicle and Highway Systems (IVHS).
Also listed as Electrical Engineering C291E. Hedrick
297. Engineering Field Studies. (1-12) One to twelve
hours of independent study per week. Must be taken
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Supervised experience
relative to specific aspects of practice in engineering.
Under guidance of a faculty member, the
student will work in an internship in industry. Emphasis
is to attain practical experience in the field. (F,SP)
Staff
298. Group Studies, Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-8) Course may be repeated for credit. Sections 1-49
to be graded on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
Sections 50 and above to be graded on a letter-grade
basis. Advanced studies in various subjects through
special seminars on topics to be selected each year.
Informal group studies of special problems, group participation
in comprehensive design problems, or group
research on complete problems for analysis and experimentation.
(F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Study or Research. (1-12) Course
may be repeated for credit. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in engineering, physics, or mathematics. Investigations
of advanced problems in mechanical engineering.
(F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral degree.
Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate standing. Individual
study in consultation with the major field adviser, intended
to provide an opportunity for qualified students
to prepare themselves for the various examinations required
of candidates for the Ph.D. (and other doctoral
degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
301. Teaching of Mechanical Engineering at the
University Level. (1-6) Course may be repeated for
credit. One hour of seminar per week. Must be taken
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Weekly seminars
and discussions on effective teaching methods. Educational
objectives. Theories of learning. The lecture
and alternative approaches. Use of media resources.
Student evaluation. Laboratory instruction. Curricula in
mechanical engineering. Practice teaching. This
course is open to Teaching Assistants of Mechanical
Engineering. (SP) Staff
Ocean Engineering
Lower Division Courses
84. Sophomore Seminar. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar
per week per unit for fifteen weeks. One and one half
hours of seminar per week per unit for 10 weeks. Two
hours of seminar per week per unit for eight weeks.
Three hours of seminar per week per unit for five
weeks. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a lettergrade
basis. Prerequisites: At discretion of instructor.
Sophomore seminars are small interactive courses offered
by faculty members in departments all across the
campus. Sophomore seminars offer opportunity for
close, regular intellectual contact between faculty
members and students in the crucial second year. The
topics vary from department to department and
semester to semester. Enrollment limited to 15 sophomores.
(F,SP)
Upper Division Courses
C164. Marine Statics and Structures. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Engineering
36. Terminology and definition of hull forms, conditions
of static equilibrium and stability of floating submerged
bodies. Effects of damage on stability. Structural loads
and response. Box girder theory. Isotropic and orthotropic
plate bending and buckling. Also listed as Mechanical
Engineering C164. (F) Mansour
C165. Ocean-Environment Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 106, Civil Engineering
100, or consent of instructor. Ocean environment.
Physical properties and characteristics of the
oceans. Global conservation laws. Surface-wave generation.
Gravity-wave mechanics. Kinematics and dynamics.
Design considerations of ocean vehicles and
systems. Model testing techniques. Prediction of resistance
and response in waves-physical modeling and
computer models. Also listed as Mechanical Engineering
C165. (F) Yeung
C180. Construction, Maintenance, and Design of
Engineered Systems. (4) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: Civil
Engineering 120, 167, and 175 or consent of instructor.
Procedures, equipment, and techniques to construct,
maintain, and design steel and concrete structures
and foundations. Management and quality
assurance, and control of these activities. Class team
projects address design, construction, and maintenance
of contemporary civil and environmental engineered
systems. Teams identify and are aided by experienced
engineers and consultants, after which they
construct a physical model of the system or a critical
part of the system. Finally they develop a formal report
on their project and present project results to a panel
of judges at the end of the semester. Also listed as
Civil and Environmental Engineering C180. (SP) Bea
Graduate Courses
C205B. Load Engineering. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 125 and 193
or equivalents and senior design experience. Processes
and procedures to determine loadings to design
or requalify structure and foundation systems including
bridges, buildings, transportation, harbor,
coastal, and offshore structures. Sources of loadings,
load processes, loading effects. Reliability, probability,
economic, and social considerations. Operating, accidental,
and environmental loadings including those
due to wind, current and wave, ground movements,
ice, snow, explosions, and fires. Also listed as Civil and
Environmental Engineering C205B. (F) Bea
C240A. Advanced Marine Structures I. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing, Statistics 25 or equivalent. Formerly Mechanical
Engineering 240A. This course introduces a
probabilistic description of ocean waves and wave
loads acting on marine structures. These topics are followed
with discussion of structural strength and reliability
analysis. Also listed as Mechanical Engineering
C240A. (F) Mansour
C240B. Advanced Marine Structures II. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing. Formerly Mechanical Engineering 240B. This
course is concerned with the structural response of
marine structures to environmental loads. Overall response
of the structure as well as the behavior of its
members under lateral and compressive loads are discussed.
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C240B.
(SP) Mansour
C241A. Marine Hydrodynamics I. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering
C165 recommended or graduate standing.
Formerly Mechanical Engineering 241A. Navier-Stokes
equations. Boundary-layer theory, laminar, and turbulent.
Frictional resistance. Boundary layer over water
surface. Separated flow modeling. Steady and unsteady
flow. Momentum theorems. Three-dimensional
water-wave theory. Formulation of wave resistance of
ships. Michell’s solution. Wave patterns. Applications.
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C241A. (F) Yeung
C241B. Marine Hydrodynamics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering
260A or Mechanical Engineering C241A recommended.
Formerly Mechanical Engineering 241B.
Momentum analysis for bodies moving in a fluid.
Added-mass theory. Matched asymptotic slender-body
theory. Small bodies in a current. Theory of motion of
floating bodies with and without forward speed. Radiation
and diffraction potentials. Wave forces. Hydroelasticity
formulation. Memory effects in time domain.
Second-order effects. Impact hydrodynamics. Also
listed as Mechanical Engineering C241B. (SP) Yeung
C243. Advanced Methods in Free-Surface Flows.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Mechanical
Engineering 260A or Mechanical Engineering
C241B recommended. Analytical and numerical methods
in free-surface problems. Elements of inviscid external
lifting and non-lifting flows. Analytical solutions
in special coordinates systems. Integral-equation methods:
formulations and implementations. Multiple-bodies
interaction problems. Free-surface Green functions
in two and three dimensions. Hybrid integral-equation
methods. Finite-element formulations. Variational forms
in time-harmonic flows. Finite-difference forms, stability
and accuracy. Boundary-fitted coordinates methods.
Unsteady linearized wave-body interaction in time domain.
Nonlinear breaking waves calculations. Particle
dynamics. Extensive hands-on experience of micro
computers and/or workstations in developing solution.
Also listed as Mechanical Engineering C243. (F,SP)
Staff
C268F. Risk Assessment and Management of
Technology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Provide
students with a broad-based understanding of primary
principles, considerations, and multidisciplinary
approaches to assessing and managing risks associated
with technologies. Technologies include all means
employed to provide objects and processes necessary
for human sustenance, productivity, entertainment,
health, and comfort. Quantitative and qualitative risk
analyses and management strategies employed in
proactive, reactive, and interactive modes will be addressed.
Also listed as Civil and Environmental Engineering
C268F. (SP) Bea, Roberts
C290A. Human and Organizational Factors: Risk
Assessment and Management of Engineered Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture/discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing. Design engineering
aspects associated with achieving desirable quality
(serviceability, safety, durability, compatibility) and reliability
of engineered systems. Human and organizational
factors in the life-cycle (design, construction,
operation, maintenance, decommissioning) reliabilities
of engineered systems. Approaches to improve quality
and reliability are advanced: proactive, reactive, and
interactive (real time) strategies and measures. Also
listed as Civil and Environmental Engineering C290A.