Mechanical
Engineering
(College of Engineering)
Department Office: 6195 Etcheverry Hall, (510) 642-1338
me.berkeley.edu
Chair: David A. Dornfeld, Ph.D.
Professors
Alice M. Agogino (The Roscoe and Elizabeth Hughes Chair
in Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University.
Decision and expert systems
Van P. Carey (The A. Richard Newton Chair), Ph.D. State
University of New York, Buffalo. Transport in multiphase
systems, thermophysics of phase-change processes
James Casey, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Continuum mechanics
Juh-Yuan Chen, Ph.D. Cornell University. Turbine
combustion, chemical kinetics, numerical simulation
Hari Dharan, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Composite materials
Robert W. Dibble, Ph.D. University of Wisconsin.
Combustion, gas dynamics David A. Dornfeld (Chair, Mechanical Engineering; The Will
C. Hall Family Chair in Engineering), Ph.D. University of
Wisconsin. Manufacturing processes, robotics
Carlos Fernandez-Pello (Associate Dean, Graduate Division;
The Almy C. Maynard and Agnes Offield Maynard
Endowed Chair), Ph.D. University of California, San
Diego. Combustion, heavy and condensed fuels
Michael Y. Frenklach, Ph.D. Hebrew University. Chemical
kinetics, combustion chemistry, chemical vapor deposition
Costas Grigoropoulos, Ph.D. Columbia University. Heat
transfer, laser materials processing J. Karl Hedrick (The James Marshall Wells Chair in
Mechanical Engineering), Ph.D. Stanford University.
Control systems, transportation systems Roberto Horowitz (The James Fife Chair), Ph.D. University
of California, Berkeley. Automatic control systems design,
robotics George C. Johnson, Ph.D. Stanford University. Ultrasonic stress evaluation Homayoon Kazerooni, D.Sc. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Mechatronics, robotics
Tony Keaveny, Ph.D. Cornell University. Tissue engineering and biomechanics Kyriakos Komvopoulos, Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Tribology, contact mechanics, mechanical
behavior of materials Dorian Liepmann, Ph.D. University of California, San Diego.
Classical fluid dynamics, bio-fluid mechanics
†Dennis K. Lieu, D. Eng. University of California, Berkeley.
High-speed electromechanic devices Liwei Lin (The Chancellor’s Professor), Ph.D. University of
California, Berkeley. NSF-Career MEMS
(microelectromechanical systems)
Fai Ma, Ph.D. California Institute of Technology. Vibration
and control
Alaa Mansour, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Structural reliability and safety, probabilistic dynamics of
marine structures, strength of ship and offshore
structures, development of design criteria
Philip Marcus, Ph.D. Princeton University. Computational
fluid dynamics
Stephen Morris, Ph.D. Johns Hopkins University.
Geophysical fluid dynamics
†Oliver M. O’Reilly (Vice Chair, Graduate Study), Ph.D.
Cornell University. Nonlinear dynamics with applications
to continuum mechanics
Andrew Packard, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Automatic control systems, mechanical systems
Panayiotis Papadopoulos, Ph.D. University of California,
Berkeley. Computational mechanics, solid mechanics
Albert P. Pisano (The FANUC Chair for Mechanical
Systems), Ph.D. Columbia University. Computer-aided
design, design optimization
†Kameshwar Poolla (The Cadences Distinguished
Professorship in the College of Engineering), Ph.D.
University of Florida, Gainesville. Dynamic systems,
automatic controls
Lisa A. Pruitt (The Lawrence Talbot Chair in Engineering),
Ph.D. Brown University. Tissue biomechanics, biomaterial
science
Robert O. Ritchie (Chair, Materials and Science Engineering;
The H. T. and Jessie Chua Distinguished Professorship in
Engineering), Sc.D. University of Cambridge. Fracture
mechanics and fatique-crack propagation
S. Shankar Sastry (Dean, College of Engineering; Director,
Blum Center for Developing Economies; and The NEC
Distinguished Professorship), Ph.D. University of
California, Berkeley. Embedded and autonomous
software, computation in novel substrates, nonlinear and
adaptive control, robotic telesurgery, control of hybrid
systems, embedded systems, sensor networks, and
biological motor control
Omer Savas, Ph.D. California Institute of Technology.
Aerodynamics, boundary layers, combustion, rotating
flows, turbulence
David J. Steigmann, Ph.D. Brown University. Continuum
mechanics, solid mechanics, shell theory,
electrodynamics
Andrew J. Szeri (Dean, Graduate Division), Ph.D. Cornell
University. Fluid dynamics and nonlinear dynamics
Masayoshi Tomizuka (Executive Associate Dean; The
Cheryl and John Neerhout Jr. Distinguished Professor),
Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Automatic
control systems, robotics and manufacturing systems
Benson Tongue, Ph.D. Princeton University. Chaotic
oscillations in dynamic systems
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 360
Paul K. Wright (Director, CITRIS, College of Engineering;
The A. Martin Berlin Professor of Mechanical
Engineering), Ph.D. University of Birmingham.
Manufacturing processes, automation
Ronald W. Yeung, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Hydromechanics, numerical modeling, surface waves,
ocean space systems
Xiang Zhang (The Ernest S. Kuh Chair in Engineering),
Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley. Nanofabrication
and processing in mechanical engineering
Tarek I. Zohdi (Vice Chair, Instruction), Habilitation Degree,
University of Hanover, Germany. Ph.D. University of
Texas, Austin. Computational mechanics
Cyril P. Atkinson (Emeritus), M.S.M.E.
*David M. Auslander (Emeritus), Sc.D.
*†Stanley A. Berger (Emeritus), Ph.D.
*David B. Bogy (The William S. Floyd Jr. Distinguished
Professor in Engineering Emeritus), Ph.D.
Gilles M. Corcos (Emeritus), Ph.D.
*Ralph Greif (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Frank E. Hauser (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Chieh S. Hsu (Emeritus), Ph.D.
*George Leitmann (Emeritus), Ph.D.
†Clayton D. Mote Jr. (The FANUC Professor of Mechanical
Systems Emeritus), Ph.D.
Patrick J. Pagni (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Charles W. Radcliffe (Emeritus), M.S., M.E.
*Boris Rubinsky (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Robert F. Sawyer (The Class of ’35 Professor of Energy
Emeritus), Ph.D.
George J. Trezek (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Kent Udell (Emeritus), Ph.D.
Associate Professors
Sara McMains, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley.
Computer graphics and geometric modeling
Lydia L. Sohn, Ph.D. Harvard University. Integrated
microfluidic devices for biological sensing
Assistant Professor
Francesco Borrelli, Ph.D. Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology ETH-Zurich. Control of dynamical systems
Adjunct Professor
Samuel Mao, Ph.D.
Overview
Mechanical engineers contribute to society by
 solving problems in transportation, energy, the
environment, and human health. The mechanical
engineer needs a thorough preparation in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, manufacturing processes,
properties of materials, mechanics, fluid
mechanics, thermodynamics, as well as intensive
design and laboratory experience. The program
of study includes basic subjects common to all
engineering fields, fundamental subjects important
to all mechanical engineers, and specia ization
in one or more phases of mechanical engineering.
Undergraduate Program
The freshman and much of the sophomore years
of the program emphasize mathematics, physics,
chemistry, computing, graphics, materials, and
statics. Students are introduced to the profession
of engineering in their freshman year in Engineering
10 and first exposed to engineering design
in their sophomore year in Engineering 28. In their
freshman year students are also introduced, in
Engineering 7, to solving engineering problems
using computers. Part of the sophomore and much
of the junior year curricula focus on engineering
science. The sophomore and junior year courses—
Mechanical Engineering 40, C85, 104, 106, 108
and Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
100—are engineering science courses covering
dynamics, fluid mechanics, strength of materials,
and thermodynamics, with elements of design and
computing included. They also introduce students
to the use of engineering concepts as tools to analyze
component and system performance. From
this solid foundation, a student synthesizes tools
from different engineering sciences and applies
them to design problems. This is the rationale for
placing much of the design component of the program
in the senior year. Specialization may be
provided in the choice of technical electives from
the subject areas of applied mechanics, automatic
controls, electrochemical systems, energy conversion,
fluid mechanics, heat transfer, manufacturing
systems, materials processing, mechanical
design, cryogenics, robotics and automation, bioengineering,
and environmental engineering.
Because of the widening range of technical problems
and the limited amount of specialization available
in the undergraduate curriculum, qualified
students should consider graduate study to expand
their scientific and technological capability. Further
details on undergraduate and graduate fields
of emphasis in mechanical engineering are available
in the College of Engineering Announcement:
A Guide to Undergraduate and Graduate Study
at coe.berkeley.edu/college-of-engineeringannouncement
. Visit the department website for
information detailing the undergraduate and graduate
program.
The B.S. program is accredited in mechanical engineering
by the Engineering Accreditation Commission
of ABET, Inc., 111 Market Place, Suite
1050, Baltimore, MD 21202-4012; (410) 347-7700.
Mechanical Engineering Minor
The department offers a minor in mechanical engineering
that is open to all students not majoring
in ME who have completed the necessary prerequisites
for the minor requirements. Information
is available on the department website.
Graduate Programs
Both master’s and doctoral programs are available.
The student may choose either a scientific
emphasis in particular areas or integrated studies
directed to professional objectives. Master of Science
and Ph.D. degrees are the relevant degrees
for the scientific emphasis, and the M.Eng and
D.Eng degrees for the professional one. The
department also offers a program leading to dual
degrees in Master of Science in engineering and
Master of Public Policy. Specialization is offered in
the following mechanical engineering disciplines:
(1) controls and dynamics, (2) design, (3) fluids,
(4) mechanics, (5) materials, and (6) energy science
and technology. Specialization is also offered
in the following focus areas: (1) bioengineering,
(2) manufacturing, (3) micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS) and nanoengineering, (4) mechatronics,
(5) energy and environment, and (6) ocean
engineering. Details on various aspects of graduate
study are available at me.berkeley.edu and
from the College of Engineering Announcement.
Note: In addition to the courses listed below, the
Department of Mechanical Engineering offers
the following courses, found in the Engineering
section of this catalog: 10, Engineering Design
and Analysis; 28, Graphic Communication in
 Engineering; 117, Methods of Engineering Analysis;
128, Advanced Engineering Design Graphics;
177, Advanced Programming with MATLAB; 191,
Engineering Ethics; 193, California Engineer
Staff; 230A, Engineering Analysis; 230B, Engineering
Analysis; 231, Mathematical Methods in
Engineering; 266A, Finite Difference Methods for
Fluid Dynamics; 266B, Spectral Methods for
Fluid Dynamics.
Lower Division Courses
24. Freshman Seminars. (1) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-4 to be graded on a letter-grade
basis. Sections 5-8 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. The Freshman Seminar Program has
been designed to provide new students with the opportunity
to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member in a small-seminar setting. Freshman seminars
are offered in all campus departments, and topics
vary from department to department and semester to
semester. (F,SP) Staff
40. Thermodynamics. (3) Students will receive no
credit for 40 after taking 105B. Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A, Engineering 7, Mathematics 1B, and
Physics 7B. This course introduces the fundamentals
of energy storage, thermophysical properties of liquids
and gases, and the basic principles of thermodynamics
which are then applied to various areas of
engineering related to energy conversion and air conditioning.
(F,SP) Staff
C85. Introduction to Solid Mechanics. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 53 and 54 (may be taken
concurrently); Physics 7A. A review of equilibrium for
particles and rigid bodies. Application to truss structures.
The concepts of deformation, strain, and stress.
Equilibrium equations for a continuum. Elements of
the theory of linear elasticity. The states of plane stress
and plane strain. Solution of elementary elasticity
problems (beam bending, torsion of circular bars).
Euler buckling in elastic beams. Also listed as Civil
and Environmental Engineering C30. (F,SP) Armero,
Papadopoulos, Zohdi
98. Supervised Independent Group Studies. (1-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Hours to be
arranged. Must be taken on a passed/not passed
basis. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Organized
group study on various topics under the sponsorship
and direction of a member of the Mechanical Engineering
faculty. (F,SP) Staff
Upper Division Courses
101. High Mix/Low Volume Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Upper
division standing in engineering or consent of instructor.
Fundamentals of high mix/low volume (HMLV)
manufacturing systems including manufacturing fundamentals,
unit operations and manufacturing line
considerations for work in process (WIP), manufacturing
lead time (MLT), economics, quality monitoring;
HMLV systems fundamentals including just in
time (JIT), kanban, buffers and line balancing; class
project/case studies for design of competitive manufacturing
systems. (F) Dornfeld, McMains
102A. Introduction to Measurement Systems for
Mechatronics. (4) Two hours of lecture, three hours
of laboratory, and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 104, 109; 132 (corequisite); Electrical
Engineering 100; Engineering 10, 28; English R1A or
equivalent course. Introduction to measurement systems
and sensors. Measurement statistics and error
propagation. Digital data acquisition and experimental
control. Basic signal processing. Introduction to the
physics, applications, and limitations of sensors. Principles
of technical communication for formal technical
reports, feasibility studies, descriptions and
instructions, and practice in oral presentations to technical
and nontechnical audiences. (F,SP)
102B. Mechatronics Design. (3) Two hours of lecture
and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
102A, Electrical Engineering 100, and Engineering
28. Introduction to design and realization of mechatronics
systems. Micro-computer architectures. Basic
computer IO devices. Embedded microprocessor systems
and control, IO programming such as analogue
to digital converters, PWM, serial and parallel outputs.
Electrical components such as power supplies,
operational amplifiers, transformers, and filters. Shielding
and grounding. Design of electric, hydraulic, and
pneumatic actuators. Design of sensors. Design of
power transmission systems. Kinematics and dynamics
of robotics devices. Basic feedback design to create
robustness and performance. (F,SP) Kazerooni, Staff
104. Engineering Mechanics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
C85 and Engineering 7. This course is an
introduction to the dynamics of particles and rigid
bodies. The material, based on a Newtonian formulation
of the governing equations, is illustrated with
numerous examples ranging from one-dimensional
motion of a single particle to planar motions of rigid
bodies and systems of rigid bodies. (F,SP) Staff
106. Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: C85
and 104 (104 may be taken concurrently). This course
introduces the fundamentals and techniques of fluid
mechanics with the aim of describing and controlling
engineering flows. (F,SP) Staff
Mechanical Engineering / 361
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
W prefix=online course
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 361
362 / Mechanical Engineering
107. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. (3) Two
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 102A; senior standing. Experimental
investigation of engineering systems and of
phenomena of interest to mechanical engineers.
Design and planning of experiments. Analysis of data
and reporting of experimental results. (F,SP) Staff
108. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(4) Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion,
and four hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
C85. This course covers elastic and plastic deformation
under static and dynamic loads. Failure by yielding,
fracture, fatigue, wear, and environmental factors
are also examined. Topics include engineering materials,
heat treatment, structure-property relationships,
elastic deformation and multiaxial loading, plastic
deformation and yield criteria, dislocation plasticity
and strengthening mechanisms, creep, stress concentration
effects, fracture, fatigue, and contact deformation.
(F,SP) Komvopoulos, Staff
109. Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of lecture and
one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 40
and 106. This course covers transport processes of
mass, momentum, and energy from a macroscopic
view with emphasis both on understanding why matter
behaves as it does and on developing practical problem
solving skills. The course is divided into four parts:
introduction, conduction, convection, and radiation.
(F,SP) Staff
110. Introduction to Product Development. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Junior
or higher standing. Provides project-based learning
experience in innovative new product development,
with a focus on mechanical engineering systems.
Design concepts and techniques are introduced, and
the student’s design ability is developed in a design or
feasibility study chosen to emphasize ingenuity and
provide wide coverage of engineering topics. Relevant
software will be integrated into studio sessions,
including solid modeling and environmental life cycle
analysis. Design optimization and social, economic,
and political implications are included. All product
ideas will be evaluated against the “triple bottom line”:
economic, societal, and environmental. Both individual
and group oral presentations are made, and par -
ticipation in a final tradeshow type presentation is
required. Staff
C117. Structural Aspects of Biomaterials. (4) Three
hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Biology 1A, Engineering 45, Civil and
Environmental Engineering 130 or 130N or Bioengineering
102, and Engineering 190. This course covers
the structure and mechanical functions of load bearing
tissues and their replacements. Natural and synthetic
load-bearing biomaterials for clinical applications are
reviewed. Biocompatibility of biomaterials and host
response to structural implants are examined. Quantitative
treatment of biomechanical issues and constitutive
relationships of tissues are covered in order to
design biomaterial replacements for structural function.
Material selection for load bearing applications
including reconstructive surgery, orthopedics, dentistry,
and cardiology are addressed. Mechanical
design for longevity including topics of fatigue, wear,
and fracture are reviewed. Case studies that examine
failures of devices are presented. This course includes
a teaching/design laboratory component that involves
design analysis of medical devices and outreach
teaching to the public community. Several problembased
projects are utilized throughout the semester
for design analysis. In addition to technical content, this
course involves rigorous technical writing assignments,
oral communication skill development and teamwork.
Also listed as Bioengineering C117. (SP) Pruitt
118. Introduction to Nanotechnology and Nano -
science. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Chemistry 1A and Physics 7B. Physics 7C
and Engineering 45 (or the equivalent) recommended.
This course introduces engineering students (juniors
and seniors) to the field of nanotechnology and
nanoscience. The course has two components:
(1) Formal lectures—students receive a set of formal
lectures introducing them to the field of nanotechnology
and nanoscience. The material covered includes
nanofabrication technology (how one achieves the
nanometer length scale, from “bottom up” to “top
down” technologies), the interdisciplinary nature of
nanotechnology and nanoscience (including areas of
chemistry, material science, physics, and molecular
biology), examples of nanoscience phenomena (the
crossover from bulk to quantum mechanical prop -
erties), and applications (from integrated circuits,
 quantum computing, MEMS, and bioengineering).
(2) Projects—students are asked to read and present
a variety of current journal papers to the class and lead
a discussion on the various works. (F,SP) Lin, Sohn
119. Introduction to MEMS (Microelectromechanical
Systems). (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 100, Physics 7B.
Fundamentals of microelectromechanical systems
including design, fabrication of microstructures; surface-micromachining,
bulk-micromachining, LIGA, and
other micro machining processes; fabrication principles
of integrated circuit device and their applications for
making MEMS devices; high-aspect-ratio microstructures;
scaling issues in the micro scale (heat transfer,
fluid mechanics and solid mechanics); device
design, analysis, and mask layout. (F) Staff
122. Processing of Materials in Manufacturing. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 108; Civil and Environmental
Engineering 130 or 130N. Fundamentals of manufacturing
processes (metal forming, metal cutting,
welding, joining, and casting); selection of metals,
plastics and other materials relative to the design and
choice of manufacturing processes. (SP) Staff
127. Composite Materials—Analysis, Design, Manufacture.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Civil and Environmental Engineering 130 or
130N or equivalent course in mechanics of materials;
Engineering 36 and 45. Properties and microstructure
of high-strength fiber materials (glass, carbon,
polymer, ceramic fibers) and matrix materials (polymer,
metal, ceramic, and carbon matrices). Specific
strength and stiffness of high-performance composites.
Stress, strain and stiffness transformations. Elastic
properties of a single orthotropic ply. Laminated plate
theory. Failure criteria. Short fiber composites. Manufacturing
processes. Sandwich panels. Joints. Design
of composite structures and components. Sustainability
and recycling. Laboratory sessions on manufacturing
processes and testing. Assigned class design
projects on design and manufacturing of composites.
(F,SP) Dharan
128. Computer-Aided Mechanical Design. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Engineering 28, and Mathematics 53,
54, or consent of instructor. Introduction to design
(not drafting) via computers. Using MATLAB and other
Finite Element software, students will be introduced to
a variety of mechanical design techniques and apply
those techniques to the design of beams, automobile
engine components, planar machine elements, linkages,
and flexure hinges. These techniques include
ad-hoc methods, exhaustive numeration, grid studies,
and informal optimizations. (SP) Lin
130. Design of Planar Machinery. (3) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
104. Synthesis, analysis, and design of planar
machines. Kinematic structure, graphical, analytical,
and numerical analysis and synthesis. Linkages,
cams, reciprocating engines, gear trains, and flywheels.
(SP) Youssefi
131. Vehicle Dynamics and Control. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Engineering 7, Math 53 and 54, and
Physics 7A-7B. Physical understanding of automotive
vehicle dynamics including simple lateral, longitudinal,
and ride quality models. An overview of active
safety systems will be introduced including the basic
concepts and terminology, the state-of-the-art development,
and basic principles of systems such as ABS,
traction control, dynamic stability control, and roll stability
control. Passive, semi-active, and active suspension
systems will be analyzed. Concepts of
autonomous vehicle technology including drive-bywire
and steer-by-wire systems, adaptive cruise control,
and lane keeping systems. Upon completion of
this course, students should be able to follow the literature
on these subjects and perform independent
design, research, and development work in this field.
(SP) Hedrick
132. Dynamic Systems and Feedback. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: Math 53, 54, Physics 7A-7B. Physical
understanding of dynamics and feedback. Linear feedback
control of dynamic systems. Mathematical tools
for analysis and design. Stability. Modeling systems
with differential equations. Linearization. Solution to
linear, time-invariant differential equations. (F,SP) Staff
133. Mechanical Vibrations. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 104. An introduction to
the theory of mechanical vibrations including topics
of harmonic motion, resonance, transient and random
excitation, applications of Fourier analysis and convolution
methods. Multidegree of freedom discrete
systems including principal mode, principal coordinates
and Rayleigh’s principle. (SP) Tongue
C134. Feedback Control Systems. (4) Students will
receive no credit for Mechanical Engineering C134/
Electrical Engineering C128 after taking Mechanical
Engineering 134 or Electrical Engineering 128. Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 132 or Electrical
Engineering 20N, and Electrical Engineering 40.
Analysis and synthesis of linear feedback control systems
in transform and time domains. Control system
design by root locus, frequency response, and state
space methods. Applications to electromechanical
and mechatronics systems. Also listed as Electrical
Engineering C128. (F) Staff
135. Design of Microprocessor-Based Mechanical
Systems. (4) Three hours of lecture and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering
7. This course provides preparation for the
conceptual design and prototyping of mechanical systems
that use microprocessors to control machine
activities, acquire and analyze data, and interact with
operators. The architecture of microprocessors is
related to problems in mechanical systems through
study of systems, including electromechanical components,
thermal components, and a variety of instruments.
Laboratory exercises lead through studies of
different levels of software. (SP) Kazerooni
140. Combustion Processes. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of demonstration laboratory. Prerequisites:
40, 106, and 109 (106 and 109 may be
taken concurrently). Fundamentals of combustion,
flame structure, flame speed, flammability, ignition,
stirred reaction, kinetics and nonequilibrium processes,
pollutant formation. Application to engines, energy
production, and fire safety. (F) Fernandez-Pello, Chen
146. Energy Conversion Principles. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
40, 106, and 109 (106 and 109 may be
taken concurrently). This course covers the fundamental
principles of energy conversion processes,
followed by development of theoretical and computational
tools that can be used to analyze energy conversion
processes. The course also introduces the
use of modern computational methods to model
energy conversion performance characteristics of
devices and systems. Performance features, sources
of inefficiencies, and optimal design strategies are
explored for a variety of applications, which may
include conventional combustion based and Rankine
power systems, energy systems for space applications,
solar, wind, wave, thermoelectric, and geothermal
energy systems. (F,SP) Carey
151. Advanced Heat Transfer. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 40, 106, and 109 (106
and 109 may be taken concurrently). Basic principles
of heat transfer and their application. Subject areas
include steady-state and transient system analyses
for conduction, free and forced convection, boiling,
condensation, and thermal radiation. (SP) Staff
163. Engineering Aerodynamics. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106. Introduction to
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 362
the lift, drag, and moment of 2-D airfoils, 3-D wings,
and the complete airplane. Calculations of the performance
and stability of airplanes in subsonic flight.
(F) Savas
164. Marine Statics and Structures. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 164 after taking C164/Ocean
Engineering C164; 2 units after taking 151. Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Civil and
Environmental Engineering 130 or 130N or consent
of instructor. Formerly C164. Terminology and definition
of hull forms, conditions of static equilibrium
and stability of floating submerged bodies. Effects of
damage on stability. Structural loads and response.
Box girder theory. Isotropic and orthotropic plate bending
and bucking. (F,SP) Mansour
165. Ocean-Environment Mechanics. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 165 after taking C165/Ocean
Engineering C165. Three hours of lecture and one
hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: 106 or
Civil and Environmental Engineering 100. Formerly
C165. Ocean environment. Physical properties and
characteristics of the oceans. Global conservation
laws. Surface-waves generation. Gravity-wave
mechanics, kinematics, and dynamics. Design consideration
of ocean vehicles and systems. Model-testing
techniques. Prediction of resistance and response
in waves—physical modeling and computer models.
(F,SP) Yeung
166. Fluid Mechanics of Biological Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 106 and 109 (may be taken concurrently).
This is a general introduction to biological
fluid mechanics. The course will primarily examine
the biological and mechanical aspect of mammalian
flow. If time allows, animal, bugs, fish, and environmental
fluid mechanics will also be covered, but the
majority of the course focuses on the blood flow in
the human body. This class does not presume previous
knowledge of anatomy. (F,SP) Savas
167. Microscale Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 40, 106, 109 (106
and 109 may be taken concurrently), Physics 7B, or
equivalent. Phenomena of physical, technological,
and biological significance in flows of gases and liquids
at the microscale. The course begins with familiar
equations of Newtonian fluid mechanics, then proceeds
to the study of essentially 1-D flows in confined
geometries with the lubrication equations. Next is a
study of the flow of thin films spreading under gravity
or surface tension gradients. Lubrication theory of
compressible gases leads to consideration of air bearings.
Two-and 3-D flows are treated with Stokes’ equations.
Less familiar physical phenomena of significance
and utility at the microscale are then considered: intermolecular
forces in liquids, slip, diffusion and bubbles
as active agents. A review of relevant aspects
of electricity and magnetism precedes a study of
 electrowetting and electrokinetically driven liquid flows.
(F) Morris, Szeri
170. Engineering Mechanics III. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104 or consent of
instructor. This course builds upon material learned
in 104, examining the dynamics of particles and rigid
bodies moving in 3-D. Topics include non-fixed axis
rotations of rigid bodies, Euler angles and parameters,
kinematics of rigid bodies, and the Newton-Euler
equations of motion for rigid bodies. The course material
will be illustrated with real-world examples such
as gyroscopes, spinning tops, vehicles, and satellites.
Applications of the material range from vehicle navigation
to celestial mechanics, numerical simulations,
and animations. (F) O’Reilly, Tongue
173. Fundamentals of Acoustics. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104. Plane and
spherical sound waves. Sound intensity. Propagation
in tubes and horns. Resonators. Standing waves.
Radiation from oscillating surface. Reciprocity. Reverberation
and diffusion. Electro-acoustic loud speaker
and microphone problems. Environmental and architectural
acoustics. Noise measurement and control.
Effects on man. (SP) Staff
175. Intermediate Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
104 or equivalent. This course introduces and
investigates Lagrange’s equations of motion for particles
and rigid bodies. The subject matter is particularly
relevant to applications comprised of inter -
connected and constrained discrete mechanical components.
The material is illustrated with numerous
examples. These range from 1-D motion of a single
particle to 3-D motions of rigid bodies and systems
of rigid bodies. (SP) Staff
C176. Orthopedic Biomechanics. (4) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion/computer workshop
per week. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering
C85/Civil Engineering C30 or Bioengineering 102
(may be taken concurrently). Proficiency in MATLAB
or equivalent. Statics, dynamics, optimization theory,
composite beam theory, beam-on-elastic foundation
theory, Hertz contact theory, and materials behavior.
Forces and moments acting on human joints; composition
and mechanical behavior of orthopedic biomaterials;
design/analysis of artificial joint, spine, and
fracture fixation prostheses; musculoskeletal tissues
including bone, cartilage, tendon, ligament, and
muscle; osteoporosis and fracture-risk predication of
bones; and bone adaptation. MATLAB-based project
to integrate the course material. Also listed as Bioengineering
C119. (F,SP) Keaveny
C180. Engineering Analysis Using the Finite Element
Method. (3) Three hours of lecture and two
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Engineering
7 or Computer Science 61A; Mathematics 53
and 54; senior status in engineering or applied science.
This is an introductory course on the finite element
method and is intended for seniors in engineering
and applied science disciplines. The course covers
the basic topics of finite element technology, including
domain discretization, polynomial interpolation, application
of boundary conditions, assembly of global
arrays, and solution of the resulting algebraic systems.
Finite element formulations for several important
field equations are introduced using both direct and
integral approaches. Particular emphasis is placed
on computer simulation and analysis of realistic engineering
problems from solid and fluid mechanics, heat
transfer, and electromagnetism. The course uses
FEMLAB, a multiphysics MATLAB-based finite element
program that possesses a wide array of modeling
capabilities and is ideally suited for instruction.
Assignments will involve both paper- and computerbased
exercises. Computer-based assignments will
emphasize the practical aspects of finite element
model construction and analysis. Also listed as Civil
and Environmental Engineering C133. (SP) Staff
185. Introduction to Continuum Mechanics. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Physics 7A; Mathematics 53, 54.
Kinematics of deformation, the concept of stress, conservation
of mass and balance of linear momentum,
angular momentum and energy. Mechanical constitutive
equations for ideal fluid, linear elastic solid.
(F) Staff
190K. Professional Communication for Mechanical
Engineers. (1) One hour of lecture per week. The
course emphasizes understanding of and performance
in professional speaking situations, including presentations,
meetings, interviews, and informal business
conversations. It emphasizes collaborative projects
with distance partners. It combines theory and practice,
integrating extensive speaking practice and individual
critiques from instructor and students. The purpose
is to advance students’ ability to collaborate and
communicate effectively in a variety of professional
environments. (F,SP) Staff
190L. Practical Control System Design: A Systematic
Loopshaping Approach. (1) One hour of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 132 or Electrical Engineering
128 (Electrical Engineering 20 may suffice)
or similar introductory experience regarding feedback
control systems. After a review of basic loopshaping,
we introduce the loopshaping design methodology of
McFarlane and Glover, and learn how to use it effectively.
The remainder of the course studies the mathematics
underlying the new method (one of the most
prevalent advanced techniques used in industry) justifying
its validity. (F,SP) Packard
190M. Model Predictive Control. (1) One hour of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 132. Basics on optimization
and polyhedra manipulation. Analysis and
design of constrained predictive controllers for linear
and nonlinear systems. (F,SP) Borrelli
190Y. Practical Control System Design: A Systematic
Optimization Approach. (1) One hour of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 132 or Electrical Engineering
128 (EE 20 may suffice) or similar introductory
experience regarding feedback control systems. The
Youla-parametrization of all stabilizing controllers
allows certain time-domain and frequency-domain
closed-loop design objectives to be cast as convex
optimizations, and solved reliably using off-the-shelf
numerical optimization codes. This course covers the
Youla parametrization, basic elements of convex optimization,
and finally control design using these techniques.
(F,SP) Packard
H194. Honors Undergraduate Research. (2-4)
Course may be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: 3.3
or higher upper-division technical GPA and consent of
instructor and adviser. Final report required. Students
who have completed a satisfactory number of ad -
vanced courses may pursue original research under
the direction of one of the members of the staff. A
maximum of 3 units of H194 may be used to fulfill
Technical Elective requirements in the Mechanical
Engineering Program (unlike 198 or 199, which do not
satisfy Technical Elective requirements). (F,SP) Staff
198. Directed Group Studies for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit.
One to four hours of directed group study per week.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Upper division standing and good academic
standing. Group study of a selected topic or topics in
mechanical engineering. Credit for 198 or 199 courses
combined may not exceed 4 units in any single term.
See college for other restrictions. (F,SP) Staff
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Course
may be repeated for credit. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor and major adviser.
Supervised independent study. Enrollment restrictions
apply; see the Introduction to Courses and Curricula
section of this catalog. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
C212. Heat and Mass Transport in Biomedical
Engineering. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 106 and 109 (106 and 109 may be
taken concurrently). Formerly Mechanical Engineering
212. Fundamental processes of heat and mass transport
in biological systems; organic molecules, cells,
biological organs, whole animals. Derivation of mathematical
models and discussion of experimental procedures.
Applications to biomedical engineering. Also
listed as Bioengineering C212. (SP) Staff
C213. Fluid Mechanics of Biological Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 106 or
equivalent, or consent of instructor. Fluid mechanical
aspects of various physiological systems, the circulatory,
respiratory, and renal systems. Motion in large
and small blood vessels. Pulsatile and peristaltic flows.
Other biofluidmechanical flows: the ear, eye, etc.
Instrumentation for fluid measurements in biological
systems and for medical diagnosis and applications.
Artificial devices for replacement of organs
and/or functions, e.g. blood oxygenators, kidney dialysis
machines, artificial hearts/circulatory assist
devices. Also listed as Bioengineering C213. (F,SP)
Berger, Liepmann
C214. Advanced Tissue Mechanics. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
C176, 185; graduate standing or consent of
instructor. Knowledge of MATLAB or equivalent. The
goal of this course is to provide a foundation for characterizing
and understanding the mechanical behavior
of load-bearing tissues. A variety of mechanics
topics will be introduced, including anisotropic elasMechanical
Engineering / 363
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
W prefix=online course
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 363
364 / Mechanical Engineering
ticity and failure, cellular solid theory, biphasic theory,
and quasi-linear viscoelasticity (QLV) theory. Building
from this theoretical basis, we will explore the constitutive
behavior of a wide variety of biological tissues.
After taking this course, students should have sufficient
background to independently study the mechanical
behavior of most biological tissues. Formal dis cussion
section will include a seminar series with external
speakers. Also listed as Bioengineering C214. (SP)
Staff
C217. Biomimetic Engineering—Engineering from
Biology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing in engineering or consent
of instructor. Study of nature’s solutions to specific
problems with the aim of determining appropriate engineering
analogs. Morphology, scaling, and design in
organisms applied to engineering structures. Mechanical
principles in nature and their application to engineering
devices. Mechanical behavior of biological
materials as governed by underlying microstructure,
with the potential for synthesis into engineered materials.
Trade-offs between redundancy and efficiency.
Students will work in teams on projects where they
will take examples of designs, concepts, and models
from biology and determine their potential in specific
engineering applications. Also listed as Integrative
Biology C217 and Bioengineering C217. (F) Dharan
C218. Introduction to MEMS Design. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering or
science; undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Physics, fabrication, and design of microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS). Micro- and nanofabrication
processes, including silicon surface and bulk
micromachining and non-silicon micromachining. Integration
strategies and assembly processes. Micro -
sensor and microactuator devices: electrostatic,
piezoresistive, piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic transduction.
Electronic position-sensing circuits and electrical
and mechanical noise. CAD for MEMS. Design
project is required. Also listed as Electrical Engineering
C245. (F,SP) Nguyen, Pister
C219. Parametric and Optimal Design of MEMS.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
119 and C218/Electrical Engineering C245 are highly
recommended but not mandatory. Formerly 219. Parametric
design and optimal design of MEMS. Emphasis
on design, not fabrication. Analytic solution of MEMS
design problems to determine the dimensions of
MEMS structures for specified function. Trade-off of
various performance requirements despite conflicting
design requirements. Structures include flexure systems,
accelerometers, and rate sensors. Also listed
as Electrical Engineering C246. (SP) Lin, Pisano
220. Precision Manufacturing. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 101, 102B, or consent
of instructor. Introduction to precision engineering
for manufacturing. Emphasis on design and performance
of precision machinery for manufacturing.
Topics include machine tool elements and structure,
sources of error (thermal, static, dynamic, process
related), precision machining processes and process
models (diamond turning and abrasive (fixed and free)
processes), sensors for process monitoring and
 control, metrology, actuators, machine design case
studies and examples of precision component manufacture.
(SP) Dornfeld
221. High-Tech Product Design and Rapid Manufacturing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week
enhanced by a semester-long “hands-on” rapid prototyping
project. Prerequisites: 101; recommended:
Basic metalprocessing, IC manufacturing; CAD, C,
and Java helpful. This is a “manufacturing survey
course” that deals with Internet-based design, rapid
prototyping, and a review of manufacturing processes
relevant to today’s production of consumer electronics
or electromechanical devices. It also aims to provide
a balanced view for the “management of technology.”
(F) Wright
222. Advanced Manufacturing Processes. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122 or consent
of instructor. This course presents an overview of
the theory of manufacturing processes, machine tool
design, and process issues in quality, production rate,
and flexibility of manufacturing. Nontraditional manufacturing
processes will be introduced. Topics covered
include overview of models of conventional
manufacturing (material removal, joining, forming, and
deforming), elements of machine tool error and
machine tool component design, nontraditional manufacturing
processes (laser, water jet, electrical discharge
machining, electro-chemical machining), rapid
prototyping, and process selection, optimization, and
planning issues. This course incorporates a laboratory
term project in the application of nontraditional
manufacturing processes. (SP) Wright
C223. Polymer Engineering. (3) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Civil and Environmental Engineering 130 or
130N, Engineering 45. A survey of the structure and
mechanical properties of advanced engineering polymers.
Topics include rubber elasticity, viscoelasticity,
mechanical properties, yielding, deformation, and fracture
mechanisms of various classes of polymers. The
course will discuss degradation schemes of polymers
and long-term performance issues. The class will
include polymer applications in bioengineering and
medicine. Also listed as Bioengineering C223. (F) Staff
224. Mechanical Behavior of Engineering Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering
130 or 130N; Engineering 45. This course
covers elastic and plastic deformation under static
and dynamic loads. Prediction and prevention of failure
by yielding, fracture, fatigue, creep, corrosion, and
wear. Basic elasticity and plasticity theories are discussed.
(SP) Staff
C225. Deformation and Fracture of Engineering
Materials. (4) Four hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Civil and Environmental Engineering 130 or
130N, Engineering 45. This course covers deformation
and fracture behavior of engineering materials for both
monotonic and cyclic loading conditions. Also listed
as Materials Science and Engineering C212. (SP)
Ritchie, Pruitt
226. Tribology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 102B, 104, 108. Surface interactions.
Fundamentals of contact mechanics. Friction theories.
Types of measurement of wear. Response of
materials to surface tractions. Plastic deformation,
void/crack nucleation and crack propagation. Delamination
wear. Microstructural effects in wear processes.
Mechanics of layered media. Solid film and boundary
liquid film lubrication. Friction and wear of polymers
and fiber-reinforced polymeric composites. Brief
introduction to metal cutting and tool wear mechanisms.
(SP) Komvopoulos
227. Mechanical Behavior of Composite Materials.
(3) Students will receive no credit for 227 after
taking 290J. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Formerly 290J. Response of composite materials
(fiber and particulate-reinforced materials) to static,
cyclic, creep and thermomechanical loading. Manufacturing
process-induced variability, and residual
stresses. Fatigue behavior, fracture mechanics, and
damage development. Role of the reinforcementmatrix
interface in mechanical behavior. Environmental
effects. Dimensional stability and thermal fatigue.
Application to polymer, metal, ceramic, and carbon
matrix composites. (SP) Dharan
228. Computer-Aided, Optimal Mechanical Design.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing and the equivalent of both 102B
and 128. This course will cover the optimal mechanical
design of mechanical systems and components. A
variety of optimization techniques will be developed,
applied to mechanical design, and implemented on
the computer. (SP) Agogino
229. Design of Basic Electromechanical Devices.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
EECS 100, graduate standing or consent of instructor.
Fundamental principles of magnetics, electro-magnetics,
and magnetic materials as applied to design
and operation of electromechanical devices. Type of
device to be used in a particular application and
dimensions of parts for the overall design will be discussed.
Typical applications covered will be linear
and rotary actuators, stepper motors, AC motors, and
DC brush and brushless motors. A design project is
required. (F,SP) Staff
230. Real-Time Applications of Mini- and Microcomputers.
(4) Three hours of lecture and three hours
of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing
in engineering or consent of instructor for advanced
undergraduates. Mini- and micro-computers, operating
in real time, have become ubiquitous components in
engineering systems. The purpose of this course is
to build competence in the engineering use of such
systems through lectures stressing small computer
structure, programming, and output/input operation,
and through laboratory work with mini- and microcomputer
systems. (F) Staff
232. Advanced Control Systems I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
134 recommended. Input-output and state
space representation of linear continuous and discrete
time dynamic systems. Controllability, observability,
and stability. Modeling and identification. Design
and analysis of single and multi-variable feedback
control systems in transform and time domain. State
observer. Feedforward/preview control. Application
to engineering systems. (F) Tomizuka, Horowitz
233. Advanced Control Systems II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
232. Linear Quadratic Optimal Control,
Stochastic State Estimation, Linear Quadratic Gaussian
Problem, Loop Transfer Recovery, Adaptive Control
and Model Reference Adaptive Systems, Self
Tuning Regulators, Repetitive Control, Application to
engineering systems. (SP) Tomizuka, Horowitz
234. Multivariable Control System Design. (3) Students
may not take 234 for credit if they have taken
291C. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
232 or EECS 221A, as well as firm foundation in classical
control. Formerly 291C. Analysis and synthesis
techniques for multi-input (MIMO) control systems.
Emphasis is on the effect that model uncertainty has
on the design process. (SP) Packard, Poolla
C236. Control and Optimization of Distributed
Parameters Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Distributed systems and PDE models of physical
phenomena (propagation of waves, network traffic,
water distribution, fluid mechanics, electromagnetism,
blood vessels, beams, road pavement, structures,
etc.). Fundamental solution methods for PDEs: separation
of variables, self-similar solutions, characteristics,
numerical methods, spectral methods. Stability
analysis. Adjoint-based optimization. Lyapunov stabilization.
Differential flatness. Viability control. Hamilton-Jacobi-based
control. Also listed as Electrical
Engineering C291 and Civil and Environmental Engineering
C291F. (SP) Staff
237. Control of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 232. Fundamental properties of
nonlinear systems. Stability of nonlinear systems.
Controller Design via Lyapunov methods. Equivalent
Linearization methods including limit cycle prediction.
(SP) Hedrick
239. Advanced Design and Automation. (4) Three
hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering
or science and one course in control. This course will
provide students with a solid understanding of smart
products and the use of embedded microcomputers in
products and machines. The course has two components:
(1) Formal lectures—students receive a set of
formal lectures on the design of smart machines and
products that use embedded microcomputers. The
materials cover machine components, actuators,
 sensors, basic electronic devices, embedded micro -
processor systems and control, power transfer com po -
nents, and mechanism design. (2) Projects—students
will design and construct prototype products that use
embedded microcomputers. (F) Kazerooni
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 364
240A. Advanced Marine Structures I. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 240A after taking
C240A/Ocean Engineering C240A. Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing;
Statistics 25 or equivalent. Formerly C240A. This
course introduces a probabilistic description of ocean
waves and wave loads acting on marine structures.
These topics are followed with discussion of structural
strength and reliability analysis. (F,SP) Mansour
240B. Advanced Marine Structures II. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 240B after taking C240B/
Ocean Engineering C240B. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Formerly
C240B. This course is concerned with the structural
response of marine structures to environmental
loads. Overall response of the structure as well as
the behavior of its members under lateral and compressive
loads are discussed. (F,SP) Mansour
241A. Marine Hydrodynamics I. (3) Students will
receive no credit for 241A after taking C241A/
Ocean Engineering C241A. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Engineering 165 recommended
or graduate standing. Formerly C241A.
Navier-Stokes Equations. Boundary-layer theory, laminar,
and turbulent. Frictional resistance. Boundary
layer over water surface. Separated flow modeling.
Steady and unsteady flow. Momentum theorems.
Three-dimensional water-wave theory. Formulation
of wave resistance of ships. Michell’s solution. Wave
patterns. Applications. (F,SP) Yeung
241B. Marine Hydrodynamics II. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 260A or 241A recommended.
Formerly Naval Architecture 241B.
Momentum analysis for bodies moving in a fluid.
Added-mass theory. Matched asymptotic slenderbody
theory. Small bodies in a current. Theory of
motion of floating bodies with and without forward
speed. Radiation and diffraction potentials. Wave
forces. Hydro-elasticity formulation. Memory effects
in time domain. Second-order effects. Impact hydrodynamics.
(F,SP) Yeung
243. Advanced Methods in Free-Surface Flows.
(3) Students will receive no credit for 243 after taking
C243/Ocean Engineering C243. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 260A or Civil Engineering
200; 241B recommended. Formerly C243. Analytical
and numerical methods in free-surface problems.
 Elements of inviscid external lifting and nonlifting
flows. Analytical solutions in special coordinates systems.
Integral-equation methods: formulations and
implementations. Multiple-bodies interaction problems.
Free-surface Green functions in 2- and 3-D.
Hybrid integral-equation methods. Finite-element formulations.
Variational forms in time-harmonic flows.
Finite-difference forms, stability, and accuracy. Boundary-fitted
coordinates methods. Unsteady linearized
wave-body interaction in time domain. Nonlinear breaking
waves calculations. Particle dynamics. Extensive
hands-on experience of microcomputers and/or workstations
in developing solution. (F,SP) Yeung
251. Heat Conduction. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 151; Engineering 230A. Analytical
and numerical methods for the determination of
the conduction of heat in solids. (F) Staff
252. Heat Convection. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 151, 265A; Engineering 230A.
The transport of heat in fluids in motion; free and
forced convection in laminar and turbulent flow over
surfaces and within ducts. (SP) Greif
253. Thermal Radiation. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 151. Thermal radiation properties
of gases, liquids, and solids; the calculation of
radiant energy transfer. (F) Grigoropoulos, Majumdar
254. Thermodynamics I. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 40. Axiomatic formulation of
macroscopic equilibrium thermodynamics. Quantum
mechanical description of atomic and molecular structure.
Statistical-mechanical evaluation of thermo -
dynamic properties of gases, liquids, and solids.
Elementary kinetic theory of gases and evaluation of
transport properties. (F) Carey
256. Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 40, 106, and 109 (106 and 109
may be taken concurrently). 140 is recommended.
Combustion modeling. Multicomponent conservation
equations with reactions. Laminar and turbulent deflagrations.
Rankine-Hugoniot relations. Diffusion flames.
Boundary layer combustion, ignition, and stability.
(SP) Dibble
257. Advanced Combustion. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 256. Critical analyses
of combustion phenomenon. Conservation relations
applied to reacting systems. Reactions are treated by
both asymptotic and numerical methods. Real hydrocarbon
kinetics are used; where available reduced
kinetic mechanics are introduced. Flame propagation
theory and experiments are discussed in detail for
both laminar and turbulent flows. (F) Staff
258. Heat Transfer with Phase Change. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 151. Heat
transfer associated with phase change processes.
Topics include thermodynamics of phase change,
evaporation, condensation, nucleation and bubble
growth, two phase flow, convective boiling and condensation,
melting and solidification. (SP) Carey
259. Microscale Thermophysics and Heat Transfer.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
151, 254, or consent of instructor. This course introduces
advanced statistical thermodynamics, nonequilibrium
thermodynamics, and kinetic theory concepts
used to analyze thermophysics of microscale systems;
and explores applications in which microscale transport
plays an important role. (SP) Carey, Majumdar
260A. Advanced Fluid Mechanics I. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
106; 185 (strongly recommended) or consent
of instructor. Introduces the foundations of fluid
mechanics. Exact flow solutions are used to develop
a physical insight of the fluid flow phenomena. Rigorous
derivation of the equations of motion. Incompressible
and compressible potential flows. Canonical
viscous flows. (F) Staff
260B. Advanced Fluid Mechanics II. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
260A or consent of instructor. Develops a
working knowledge of fluid mechanics by identifying
the essential physical mechanism in complex canonical
flow problems which leads to simplified yet accurate
formulation. Boundary layers, creeping flows,
rotational flows, rotating flows. Stability and transition,
introduction to turbulence. (SP) Staff
260D. Advanced Fluid Mechanics IV. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 260A and B, or 241A; or consent
of instructor. Expanded coverage of compressible
flow and boundary layers beyond material in 260A260B.
Time-harmonic elements of free-surface flows.
(F,SP) Berger
262. Hydrodynamic Stability and Instability. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185
and 106, or equivalents. Discussions of linear and
nonlinear instabilities in a variety of fluid flows: thermal
convection, Rayleigh-Taylor flows, shearing flows, circular
and cylindrical Couette flows (i.e., centrifugal
instability). Use of the Landau equation, bifurcation
diagrams, and energy methods for nonlinear flows.
(F) Marcus
263. Turbulence. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 260A-260B or equivalent. Physics of
turbulence: Summary of stability and transition.
Description of turbulence phenomena. Tools for studying
turbulence. Homogeneous turbulence, shear turbulence,
rotating turbulence. Summary of engineering
models. Discussion of recent advances. (SP) Savas
266. Dynamics and Stability of Engineering and
Geophysical Flows with Rotation, Convection, or
Waves. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
260A and 260B or consent of instructor. Formerly
260C. A presentation of four related topics in
high Reynolds number flow: stability theory, waves,
rotating flows, and geophysical/astrophysical fluid
dynamics. Linear stability of classical, shear, convecting,
and rotating flows are reviewed. Weakly nonlinear
stability is examined with amplitude equations
and numerical studies of sub-critical instabilities of
pipe and channel flows are discussed. Rapidly rotating
flows are analyzed by asymptotically deriving the
quasi-geotrophic and shallow water equations. Examples
of geophysical flows include vortex dynamics in
the atmosphere and ocean, jet streams and waves
(Rossby, Poincare, inertial, internal gravity and Kelvin).
The mathematical formulation of hyperbolic waves in
stratified, free surface, and compressible flows is discussed
and applied to flows with shocks and breaking
waves. (F,SP) Staff
C268. Physicochemical Hydrodynamics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: A first graduate
course in fluid mechanics is recommended. An
introduction to the hydrodynamics of capillarity and
wetting. Balance laws and short-range forces. Dimensionless
numbers, scaling and lubrication approximation.
Rayleigh instability. Marangoni effect. The
moving contact line. Wetting and short-range forces.
The dynamic contact angle. Dewetting. Coating flows.
Effect of surfactants and electric fields. Wetting of
rough or porous surfaces. Contact angles for evaporating
systems. Also listed as Chemical Engineering
C268. (F,SP) Morris
273. Oscillations in Linear Systems. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 104 and 133.
Response of discrete and continuous dynamical systems,
damped and undamped, to harmonic and general
time-dependent loading. Convolution integrals
and Fourier and Laplace Transform methods.
Lagrange’s equations; Eigensolutions; Orthogonality;
generalized coordinates; nonreciprocal and degenerate
systems; Rayleigh quotient. (F) Ma
274. Random Oscillations of Mechanical Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
104 and 133. Random variables and random processes.
Stationary, nonstationary, and ergodic proceses.
Analysis of linear and nonlinear, discrete and
continuous, mechanical systems under stationary and
nonstationary excitations. Vehicle dynamics. Applications
to failure analysis. Stochastic estimation
and control and their applications to vibratory systems.
(SP) Ma
275. Advanced Dynamics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 175. Review of Lagran -
gian dynamics. Legendre transform and Hamilton’s
equations, Cyclic coordinates, Canonical transformations,
Hamilton-Jacobi theory, integrability. Dynamics
of asymmetric systems. Approximation theory. Current
topics in analytical dynamics. (F) Staff
277. Oscillations in Nonlinear Systems. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 175. Oscillations
in nonlinear systems having one or two degrees
of freedom. Qualitative and quantitative methods:
graphical, iteration, perturbation, and asymptotic methods.
Self-excited oscillations, limit cycles, and domains
of attraction. (F,SP) Szeri
C279. Statistical Mechanics of Elasticity. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185, or Civil
and Environmental Engineering C231, or Material Science
and Engineering C211, or consent of instructor.
Introduction to statistical mechanics for engineers
interested in the constitutive behavior of matter with a
particular interest in continua. Systems of interest will
be polymers and crystalline solids. Coverage includes
introduction to statistical mechanics, ensembles, phase
spaces, partitions functions, free energy, polymer
chain statistics, polymer networks, harmonic and
quasi-harmonic crystalline solids, limitations of classical
methods and quantum mechanical influences. Also
listed as Civil and Environmental Engineering C235.
(F) Govindjee, Papadopoulos
280A. Introduction to the Finite Element Method.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
or computer laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
50A-50B; some familiarity with elementary
field theories of solid/fluid mechanics and/or thermal
science. Formerly 280. Weighted-residual and variational
methods of approximation. Canonical construction
of finite element spaces. Formulation of
Mechanical Engineering / 365
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
W prefix=online course
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 365
366 / Mechanical Engineering
element and global state equations. Applications to
linear partial differential equations of interest in engineering
and applied science. (F) Papadopoulos, Zohdi
280B. Finite Element Methods in Nonlinear Continua.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
280A or equivalent; background in continuum
mechanics at the level of 185. A brief review of continuum
mechanics. Consistent linearization of kinematical
variables and balance laws. Incremental
formulations of the equations of motion. Solution of
the nonlinear field equations by Newton’s method and
its variants. General treatment of constraints. Applications
to nonlinear material and kinematical modeling
on continua. (SP) Papadopoulos
281. Methods of Tensor Calculus and Differential
Geometry. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Mathematics 53 and 54. Methods of tensor
calculus and classical differential geometry. The tensor
concept and the calculus of tensors, the RiemannChristoffel
tensor and its properties, Riemannian and
Euclidean spaces. Geometry of a surface, formulas
of Weingarten, and equations of Gauss and Codazzi.
(F) Staff
282. Theory of Elasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Fundamentals and general
theorems of the linear theory of elasticity (in three
dimensions) and the formulation of static and dynamic
boundary value problems. Application to torsion, flexure,
and 2-D problems of plane strain, generalized
plane stress, and bending of plates. Representation of
basic field equations in terms of displacement potentials
and stress functions. Some basic 3-D solutions.
(SP) Bogy, Steigmann
283. Wave Propagation in Elastic Media. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. Propagation
of mechanical disturbances in unbounded and
bounded media. Surface waves, wave reflection and
transmission at interfaces and boundaries. Stress
waves due to periodic and transient sources. Some
additional topics may vary with instructor. (F) Bogy
284. Nonlinear Theory of Elasticity. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 284 after taking 284A. Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281.
Formerly 284A. Fundamentals of nonlinear theory of
elasticity. Exact solutions in elastostatics by inverse
and semi-inverse methods. The method of successive
approximations. Small deformations superposed
on finite deformations. Nonlinear oscillations, shocks
and acceleration waves, progressive waves and standing
waves of finite amplitude, waves in pre-stressed
solids. (F,SP) Casey
285A. Foundations of the Theory of Continuous
Media. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185. Formerly 285. A general development of
thermodynamics of deformable media, entropy production,
and related entropy inequalities. Thermomechanical
response of dissipative media, including those
for viscous fluids and nonlinear elastic solids. A discussion
of invariance, internal constraints, material
symmetry, and other special topics. (F,SP) Casey
285B. Surfaces of Discontinuity and Inhomogeneities
in Deformable Continua. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185. Finitely deforming
thermo-mechanical media. Moving surfaces of
 discontinuity. Shock waves and acceleration waves
in elastic materials. The Eshelby tensor and Eshelbian
mechanics. Fracture. Microstructured continua.
(F,SP) Casey
285C. Electrodynamics of Continuous Media. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: A first
course in continuum mechanics (such as 185 or Civil
Engineering 231). Formerly 284B. This course presents
the fundamentals of electromagnetic interactions
in deformable continuous media. It develops the
background necessary to understand various modern
technologies involving MEMS devices, sensors and
actuators, plasmas, and a wide range of additional
phenomena. The emphasis of this course is on fundamentals,
beginning with Maxwell’s equations in
vacuum, the ether relations and their extension to
electromagnetic interactions in materials. The treatment
is general within the limits of nonrelativistic
physics and accommodates coupling with mechanical
and thermal effects. The topics discussed are all
developed at a general level including the effects of
finite deformations. Various linear models, which are
especially useful in applications, are developed through
specialization of general theory. This course will be
of interest to students in engineering, physics, and
applied mathematics. (F,SP) Steigmann
286. Theory of Plasticity. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 185. Formulation of the theory
of plasticity relative to loading surfaces in both strain
space and stress space and associated loading criteria.
Nonlinear constitutive equations for finitely
deformed elastic-plastic materials. Discussion of strainhardening
and special cases. Applications. (F) Casey,
Papadopoulos
287. Multiscale Modeling and Design of New Materials.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
185 or equivalent. This course focuses on
methods for the modeling, analysis, numerical simulation,
and design of microheterogeneous materials,
with a central theme being the determination of relationships
between the microstructure and the macroscopic
response or “macroscale property.” The course
is self-contained and is designed in an interdisciplinary
manner for graduate students in engineering, applied
mathematics, materials science, and physics who are
interested in methods to accelerate the laboratory
analysis and design of new materials. Examples draw
primarily from various mechanical, diffusive, and thermal
applications, although the techniques developed
apply to any partial differential system possessing
oscillatory coefficients. (SP) Zohdi
288. Theory of Elastic Stability. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 185 and 273. Dynamic
stability of elastic bodies. Small motion on finite deformation.
Classical treatments of buckling problems.
Snapthrough and other global stability problems. Stability
theory based upon nonlinear 3-D theory of elasticity.
(F) Steigmann
289. Theory of Shells. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: 185 and 281. A direct formulation
of a general theory of shells and plates based on
the concept of Cosserat (or Directed) surfaces. Non -
linear constitutive equations for finitely deformed
elastic shells. Linear theory and a special nonlinear
theory with small strain accompanied by large or moderately
large rotation. Applications. (F,SP) Johnson,
Steigmann
290A. Nonlinear Dynamics of Continuous Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
175, 185. This course uses methods from
dynamical systems theory for the analysis of the nonlinear
dynamics of elastic bodies. Various methods
for modeling these bodies will be used, and the
dynamics predicted by these models of the body will
be explored. Of particular interest will be the dynamics
of nonlinearly elastic rods and strings. (SP) O’Reilly
290C. Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Lectures on special topics which will be announced
at the beginning of each semester that the course is
offered. Topics may include transport and mixing,
 geophysical fluid dynamics, biofluid dynamics, ocean -
og raphy, free surface flows, non-Newtonian fluid
mechanics, among other possibilities. (F,SP) Savas,
Yeung
290D. Solid Modeling. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Prerequisites: Computer Science 61B or equivalent,
linear algebra; Computer Science 184 recommended.
Graduate survey of solid modeling research.
Representations and algorithms for 3-D solid geometry.
Applications in design, analysis, planning, and
manufacturing of mechanical parts, including
CAD/CAM, reverse engineering, meshing, feature
recognition, mold-making, and rapid prototyping. (SP)
McMains
290G. Laser Processing and Diagnostics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing. Fundamentals of optical energy coupling
with materials. Lasers and beam delivery systems.
Thermal transport in irradiated targets: conductive
heat transfer, stress field, melting and solidification,
surface vaporization, explosive phase-change, plasma
formation. Ultra-fast (picosecond and femtosecond)
laser processing. Laser processing of thin films: continuous
wave laser annealing, pulsed laser annealing.
Laser-induced surface modification: mass transfer
in shallow doping, flow redistribution and topography
generation, miniature modification of glass surfaces.
Desorption at low-energy densities: time-of-flight spectrometry.
Dynamics of laser-ablated plumes: computational
modeling, probe beam deflection, emission
and laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy. Processing
of polymers. Laser interaction with liquids.
Laser cleaning. Laser interactions with nanoparticles
and clusters. Advanced microfabrication applications.
Laser-assisted nano-structuring of surface properties.
Optical measurement of thermal properties. Laserbased
sensors and non-contact diagnostics. Offered
alternate years. (F) Grigoropoulos
290H. Green Product Development: Design for
Sustainability. (3) Three hours of lecture per week,
plus optional discussion section. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in Engineering or Information, or consent
of instructor. The focus of the course is management
of innovation processes for sustainable products, from
product definition to sustainable manufacturing and
financial models. Using a project in which students
will be asked to design and develop a product or service
focused on sustainability, we will teach processes
for collecting customer and user needs data, prioritizing
that data, developing a product specification,
sketching and building product prototypes, and interacting
with the customer/community during product
development. The course is intended as a very handson
experience in the “green” product development
process. The course will be a management of technology
course offered jointly with the College of Engineering
and the Haas School of Business. In addition,
it will also receive credit towards the new Certificate on
Engineering Sustainability and Environmental Management
Program. We aim to have half MBA students
and half engineering students (with a few other students,
such as from the School of Information) in the
class. The instructors will facilitate students to form
mixed disciplinary reams for the development of their
“green” products. (F,SP) Agogino, Beckmann
290J. Predictive Control for Linear and Hybrid Systems.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
232. Advanced optimization, polyhedra
manipulation, and multiparametric programming. Invariant
set theory. Analysis and design of constrained
predictive controllers for linear systems. Computational
oriented models of hybrid systems. Analysis
and design of constrained predictive controllers for
hybrid systems. (F,SP) Borrelli
290L. Introduction to Nano-Biology. (3) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. This
course introduces graduate students in mechanical
engineering to the nascent field of nano-biology. The
course is comprised of both formal lectures and projects.
Lectures will include an introduction to both
molecular biology (components of cells, protein structure
and function, DNA, gene regulation, etc.) and
nanotechnology (”bottom up” and “top down” nano -
technologies), an overview of current instrumentation
in biology, an in-depth description of the recent integration
of molecular biology with nanotechnology (for
sensing or labeling purposes, elucidating information
on cells, etc.), and an introduction to systems biology
(design principles of biological circuits). Students will
read and present a variety of current journal papers to
the class and lead a discussion on the various works.
(F,SP) Sohn
290M. Expert Systems in Mechanical Engineering.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
102A and 102B or equivalent. Introduction to
artificial intelligence and decision analysis in mechanical
engineering. Fundamentals of analytic design,
probability theory, failure analysis, risk assessment,
and Bayesian and logical inference. Applications to
expert systems in probabilistic mechanical engineering
design and failure diagnostics. Use of automated
influence diagrams to codify expert knowledge and
to evaluate optimal design decisions. (SP) Agogino
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:41 PM Page 366
290N. System Identification. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 232, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences 221A or consent of
instructor. This course is intended to provide a comprehensive
treatment of both classical system identification
and recent work in control-oriented system
identification. Numerical, practical, and theoretical
aspects will be covered. Topics treated include time
and frequency domain methods, generalized parameter
estimation, identification of structured nonlinear
systems, modeling uncertainty bounding, and statespace
methods. (F,SP) Poolla
290P. New Product Development: Design Theory
and Methods. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing, consent of instructor.
This course is aimed at developing the inter -
disciplinary skills required for successful product
development in today’s competitive marketplace. We
expect students to be disciplinary experts in their own
field (e.g., engineering, business). By bringing together
multiple perspectives, we will learn how product development
teams can focus their efforts to quickly create
cost-effective products that exceed customers’ expectations.
(F) Agogino
290Q. Dynamic Control of Robotic Manipulators.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week for five weeks,
one hour of lecture per week for 10 weeks, four hours
of laboratory per week for full term. Prerequisites:
230, 232, or consent of instructor. Dynamic and kinematic
analysis of robotic manipulators. Sensors (position,
velocity, force, and vision). Actuators and power
transmission lines. Direct drive and indirect drive.
Point to point control. Straight and curved path following.
Industrial practice in servo control. Applications
of optimal linear quadratic control, preview
control, nonlinear control, and direct/indirect adaptive
controls. Force control and compliance control. Collision
avoidance. Utilization of dynamic controls (SP)
Horowitz, Kazerooni
290R. Topics in Manufacturing. (3) Course may be
repeated for credit as topic varies. Three hours of
 lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Advanced topics in manufacturing research. Topics
vary from year to year. (F,SP) Dornfeld, Mc Mains,
Wright
C290S. Hybrid Systems and Intelligent Control.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Formerly 291E.
Analysis of hybrid systems formed by the interaction of
continuous time dynamics and discrete-event controllers.
Discrete-event systems models and language
descriptions. Finite-state machines and automata.
Model verification and control of hybrid systems.
Signal-to-symbol conversion and logic controllers.
Adaptive, neural, and fuzzy-control systems. Applications
to robotics and Intelligent Vehicle and Highway
Systems (IVHS). Also listed as Electrical Engineering
C291E. Staff
290T. Plasmonic Materials. (3) Course may be
repeated for credit as topic varies. Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Physics 110A or consent
of instructor. This course deals with fundamental
aspects of plasmonic materials. The electromagnetic
responses of those artificially constructed materials
will be discussed. Physics of surface plasmons and
dispersion engineering will be introduced. Resonant
phenomena associated with the negative permittivity
and permeability and the left-handed propagation will
be presented. Methods of design, fabrication, and
characterization of plasmonic materials will be discussed.
(F,SP) Zhang
C290X. Advanced Technical Communication: Proposals,
Patents, and Presentations. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing, and students must have passed their Ph.D.
qualifying examination. This course will help the
advanced Ph.D. student further develop critically
important technical communication traits via a series
of lectures, interactive workshops, and student projects
that will address the structure and creation of
effective research papers, technical reports, patents,
proposals, business plans, and oral presentations.
One key concept will be the emphasis on focus and
clarity—achieved through critical thinking regarding
objectives and context. Examples will be drawn primarily
from health care and bioengineering multidisciplinary
applications. Also listed as Bioengineering
C290D. (SP) Keaveny, Pruitt
290Z. Topics in Control, Modeling, and Optimization.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
232 and 233. Advanced topics in control,
modeling and optimization research with extensive
illustrative applications to diverse areas in mechanical
engineering systems and mechatronics. Topics will
vary from year to year and will be announced at the
beginning of each semester that the course is offered.
Theoretical issues covered in the course include topics
such as iterative learning control, control over networks,
and modeling for controls. The illustrative
applications will be drawn from such topics as mechatronics
for improving the quality of life among others.
(F,SP) Staff
298. Group Studies, Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-8) Course may be repeated for credit. Sections 1-49
to be graded on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
Sections 50 and above to be graded on a letter-grade
basis. Advanced studies in various subjects through
special seminars on topics to be selected each year.
Informal group studies of special problems, group participation
in comprehensive design problems, or group
research on complete problems for analysis and experimentation.
(F,SP) Staff
C298A. Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (1,2) Course
may be repeated for credit. One hour of seminar per
week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Lectures on
special topics will be announced at the beginning of
each semester that the course is offered. Topics may
include transport and mixing, geophysical fluid dynamics,
biofluid dynamics, oceanography, free surface
flows, non-Newtonian fluid mechanics, among other
possibilities. Also listed as Environ Sci, Policy, and
Management C291, Physics C290I, Mathematics
C290C, Chemical Engineering C295M, Civil and Environmental
Engineering C290K, and Bioengineering
C290C. (F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Study or Research. (1-12) Course
may be repeated for credit. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate
standing in engineering, physics, or mathematics.
Investigations of advanced problems in mechanical
engineering. (F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral
degree. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate standing. Individual
study in consultation with the major field adviser,
intended to provide an opportunity for qualified students
to prepare themselves for the various examinations
required of candidates for the Ph.D. (and other
doctoral degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
301. Teaching of Mechanical Engineering at the
University Level. (1-6) Course may be repeated for
credit. One hour of seminar per week. Must be taken
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Weekly seminars
and discussions on effective teaching methods. Educational
objectives. Theories of learning. The lecture
and alternative approaches. Use of media resources.
Student evaluation. Laboratory instruction. Curricula in
mechanical engineering. Practice teaching. This
course is open to teaching assistants of mechanical
engineering. (SP) Staff