Electrical Engineering
Lower Division Courses
20N. Structure and Interpretation of Systems and
Signals. (4) Three hours of lecture and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B.
Mathematical modeling of signals and systems.
 Continous and discrete signals, with applications to
audio, images, video, communications, and control.
State-based models, beginning with automata and
evolving to LTI systems. Frequency domain models
for signals and frequency response for systems, and
 sampling of continuous-time signals. A MATLABbased
laboratory is an integral part of the course.
(F,SP) Ayazibar
24. Freshman Seminar. (1) One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a letter-grade
basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. The Freshman Seminar Program has
been designed to provide new students with the opportunity
to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member in a small-seminar setting. Freshman seminars
are offered in all campus departments, and topics
may vary from department to department and semes -
ter to semester. (F,SP)
40. Introduction to Microelectronic Circuits. (4)
Students will receive one unit of credit for 40 taking 42
and no credit after taking 100. Three hours of lecture,
three hours of laboratory, and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B and Physics
7B. Fundamental circuit concepts and analysis
 techniques in the context of digital electronic circuits.
Transient analysis of CMOS logic gates; basic integrated-circuit
technology and layout. (F,SP) Staff
42. Introduction to Digital Electronics. (3) Students
will receive no credit for 42 after taking 40 or 100.
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B. This course
serves as an introduction to the principles of electrical
engineering, starting from the basic concepts of voltage
and current and circuit elements of resistors,
capacitors, and inductors. Circuit analysis is taught
using Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws with
Thevenin and Norton equivalents. Operational amplifiers
with feedback are introduced as basic building
blocks for amplication and filtering. Semiconductor
devices including diodes and MOSFETS and their IV
characteristics are covered. Applications of diodes for
rectification, and design of MOSFETs in common
source amplifiers are taught. Digital logic gates and
design using CMOS as well as simple flip-flops are
introduced. Speed and scaling issues for CMOS are
considered. The course includes as motivating examples
designs of high level applications including logic
circuits, amplifiers, power supplies, and communication
links. (F,SP) Staff
43. Introductory Electronics Laboratory. (1) Three
hours of laboratory per week. Must be taken on a
passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: 42 (may be
taken concurrently) or equivalent or consent of instructor.
Using and understanding electronics laboratory
equipment such as oscilloscope, power supplies, function
generator, multimeter, curve-tracer, and RLCmeter.
Includes a term project of constructing and
testing a robot or other appropriate electromechanical
device. (F,SP) Staff
98. Directed Group Study for Undergraduates. (1-
4) Course may be repeated for credit. Course format
varies. Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Group study of selected topics in electrical engineering,
usually relating to new developments. (F,SP) Staff
Upper Division Courses
100. Electronic Techniques for Engineering. (4)
Students will receive one unit of credit for 100 after
taking 42 and no credit after taking 40. Three hours of
lecture, three hours of laboratory, and one hour of
discussion per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 1B.
This course serves as an introduction to the principles
of electrical engineering, starting from the basic
concepts of voltage and current and circuit elements of
resistors, capacitors, and inductors. Circuit analysis
is taught using Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws
with Thevenin and Norton equivalents. Operational
amplifiers with feedback are introduced as basic building
blocks for amplification and filtering. Semiconductor
devices including diodes and MOSFETS and
their IV characteristics are covered. Applications of
diodes for rectification, and design of MOSFETs in
common source amplifiers are taught. Digital logic
gates and design using CMOS as well as simple flipflops
are introduced. Speed and scaling issues for
CMOS are considered. The course includes as motivating
examples designs of high-level applications
including logic circuits, amplifiers, power supplies, and
communication links. (F,SP) Staff
105. Microelectronic Devices and Circuits. (4) Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40. This
course covers the fundamental circuit and device concepts
needed to understand analog integrated circuits.
After an overview of the basic properties of
semiconductors, the p-n junction and MOS capacitors
are described and the MOSFET is modeled as
a large-signal device. Two port small-signal amplifiers
and their realization using single stage and multistage
CMOS building blocks are discussed. Sinusoidal
steady-state signals are introduced and the techniques
of phasor analysis are developed, including impedance
and the magnitude and phase response of linear circuits.
The frequency responses of single- and multistage
amplifiers are analyzed. Differential amplifiers
are introduced. (F,SP) Staff
113. Power Electronics. (4) Three hours of lecture
and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
105 or consent of instructor. Power conversion circuits
and techniques. Characterization and design of
magnetic devices including transformers, reactors,
and electromagnetic machinery. Characteristics of
bipolar and MOS power semiconductor devices. Applications
to motor control, switching power supplies,
lighting, power systems, and other areas as appropriate.
(SP) Staff
117. Electromagnetic Fields and Waves. (4) Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and one and
one-half hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
40, Mathematics 53, 54, knowledge of phasor
analysis (e.g. as taught in 105). Formerly 117A-117B.
Review of static electric and magnetic fields and applications;
Maxwell’s equations; transmission lines; propagation
and reflection of plane waves; introduction to
guided waves, microwave networks, and radiation
and antennas. Mini-labs on statics, transmission lines,
and waves. (F,SP) Staff
119. Introduction to Optical Engineering. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Physics 7C. Fundamental principles of
optical systems. Geometrical optics and aberration
theory. Stops and apertures, prisms, and mirrors.
Diffraction and interference. Optical materials and
coatings. Radiometry and photometry. Basic optical
devices and the human eye. The design of optical systems.
Lasers, fiber optics, and holography. (SP) Staff
120. Signals and Systems. (4) Four hours of lecture
and one hour of recitation per week. Prerequisites:
20N; Mathematics 53, 54. Continuous and discretetime
transform analysis techniques with illustrative
applications. Linear and time-invariant systems, transfer
functions. Fourier series, Fourier transform, Laplace
and Z-transforms. Sampling and reconstruction. Solution
of differential and difference equations using transforms.
Frequency response, Bode plots, stability
analysis. Illustrated by analysis of communication systems
and feedback control systems. (F,SP) Staff
121. Introduction to Digital Communication Systems.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 120, 126. Introduction
to the basic principles of the design and analysis of
modern digital communication systems. Topics include
source coding, channel coding, baseband and passband
modulation techniques, receiver design, and
channel equalization. Applications to design of digital
telephone modems, compact disks, and digital
wireless communication systems. Concepts illustrated
by a sequence of MATLAB exercises. (SP) Staff
122. Introduction to Communication Networks. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
one hour of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Computer
Science 61B; Mathematics 53 or 54. This course
is an introduction to the design and implementation
of computer networks. We will focus on the concepts
and fundamental design principles that have
contributed to the Internet’s scalability and robustness
and survey the underlying technologies—
e.g., Ethernet, 802.11, DSL, optical links—that have
led to the Internet’s phenomenal success. Topics
include layering, congestion/flow/error control, routing,
address ing, multicast, packet scheduling, switching,
inter networking, network security, and networking/
programming interfaces. (F,SP) Staff
123. Digital Signal Processing. (4) Three hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion, and one hour of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 120. Discrete time
signals and systems: Fourier and Z transforms, DFT,
2-D versions. Digital signal processing topics: flow
graphs, realizations, FFT, chirp-Z algorithms, Hilbert
transform relations, quantization effects, linear prediction.
Digital filter design methods: windowing,
 frequency sampling, S-to-Z methods, frequencytransformation
methods, optimization methods, 2-D
filter design. (SP) Staff
C125. Introduction to Robotics. (4) Three hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion, and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 120 or equivalent,
consent of instructor. An introduction to the kinematics,
dynamics, and control of robot manipulators, robotic
vision, and sensing. The course covers forward and
inverse kinematics of serial chain manipulators, the
manipulator Jacobian, force relations, dynamics, and
control. It presents elementary principles on proximity,
tactile, and force sensing, vision sensors, camera
 calibration, stereo construction, and motion detection.
The course concludes with current applications of
robotics in active perception, medical robotics, and
other areas. Also listed as Bioengineering C125.
(F) Bajcsy
126. Probability and Random Processes. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 20. This course covers the fundamentals
of probability and random processes useful in
fields such as networks, communication, signal processing,
and control. Sample space, events, probability
law. Conditional probability. Independence.
Random variables. Distribution, density functions.
Random vectors. Law of large numbers. Central limit
theorem. Estimation and detection. Markov chains.
(F,SP) Staff
127A. Optimization Models in Engineering. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Math 54. Optimization models
in engineering. Linear, quadratic convex, and secondorder
cone optimization. Applications in engineering,
circuit design, signal processing, finance operations
research, machine learning, computer science, bioengineering.
(SP) El Ghaoui
C128. Feedback Control Systems. (4) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Analysis
and synthesis of linear feedback control systems
in transform and time domains. Control system design
by root locus, frequency response, and state space
methods. Applications to electromechanical and
mechatronics systems. Also listed as Mechanical Engineering
C134. (F) Staff
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:40 PM Page 240
129. Neural and Nonlinear Information Processing.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
120 or consent of instructor. Principles of
massively parallel real-time computation, optimization,
and information processing via nonlinear dynamics
and analog VLSI neural networks, applications
selected from image processing, pattern recognition,
feature extraction, motion detection, data compression,
secure communication, bionic eye, auto waves,
and Turing patterns. (SP) Chua
130. Integrated-Circuit Devices. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
40 or 100. Overview of electronic properties of
semiconductor. Metal-semiconductor contacts, pn
junctions, bipolar transistors, and MOS field-effect transistors.
Properties that are significant to device operation
for integrated circuits. Silicon device fabrication
technology. (F,SP) Staff
140. Linear Integrated Circuits. (4) Three hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion, and two hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 105. Single and multiple
stage transistor amplifiers. Operational amplifiers.
Feedback amplifiers, 2-port formulation, source, load,
and feedback network loading. Frequency response of
cascaded amplifiers, gain-bandwidth exchange, compensation,
dominant pole techniques, root locus.
Supply and temperature independent biasing and references.
Selected applications of analog circuits such
as analog-to-digital converters, switched capacitor
 filters, and comparators. The laboratory builds on the
concepts presented in the lectures and provides
hands-on design experience and help with the use
of computer aided design tools such as SPICE.
(F,SP) Staff
141. Introduction to Digital Integrated Circuits. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40;
105 and 150 recommended. CMOS devices and deep
sub-micron manufacturing technology. CMOS inverters
and complex gates. Modeling of interconnect wires.
Optimization of designs with respect to a number of
metrics: cost, reliability, performance, and power dissipation.
Sequential circuits, timing considerations,
and clocking approaches. Design of large system
blocks, including arithmetic, interconnect, memories,
and programmable logic arrays. Introduction to design
methodologies, including hands-on experience. (F,SP)
Alon, Rabaey
142. Integrated Circuits for Communications. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 20
and 140. Analysis and design of electronic circuits for
communication systems, with an emphasis on integrated
circuits for wireless communication systems.
Analysis of noise and distortion in amplifiers with application
to radio receiver design. Power amplifier design
with application to wireless radio transmitters. Radiofrequency
mixers, oscillators, phase-locked loops,
modulators, and demodulators. (F) Staff
143. Microfabrication Technology. (4) Three hours
of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: 40 and Physics 7B. Integrated circuit
device fabrication and surface micromachining technology.
Thermal oxidation, ion implantation, impurity
diffusion, film deposition, expitaxy, lithography, etching,
contacts and interconnections, and process integration
issues. Device design and mask layout, relation
between physical structure and electrical/mechanical
performance. MOS transistors and poly-Si surface
microstructures will be fabricated in the laboratory
and evaluated. (F,SP) Staff
144. Fundamental Algorithms for Systems Modeling,
Analysis, and Optimization. (4) Four hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 20; Computer Science
70 or consent of instructor. The modeling, analysis,
and optimization of complex systems requires a
range of algorithms and design software. This course
reviews the fundamental techniques underlying the
design methodology for complex systems, using integrated
circuit design as example. Topics include
design flows, discrete and continuous models and
algorithms, and strategies for implementing algorithms
efficiently and correctly in software. Laboratory assignments
and a class project will expose students to
state-of-the-art tools. (F,SP) Staff
C145B. Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 20N and
Engineering 7, or equivalent. Electrical Engineering
120 recommended. Knowledge of MATLAB or linear
algebra assumed. Biomedical imaging is a clinically
important application of engineering, applied mathematics,
physics, and medicine. In this course, we apply
linear systems theory and basic physics to analyze
X-ray imaging, computerized tomography, nuclear
medicine, and MRI. We cover the basic physics and
instrumentation that characterizes medical image as an
ideal perfect-resolution image blurred by an impulse
response. This material could prepare the student for
a career in designing new medical imaging systems
that reliably detect small tumors or infarcts. Also listed
as Bioengineering C165. (F) Conolly
C145L. Introductory Electronic Transducers Laboratory.
(3) Two hours of lecture and three hours of
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40. Laboratory
exercises exploring a variety of electronic transducers
for measuring physical quantities such as temperature,
force, displacement, sound, light, ionic
potential; the use of circuits for low-level differential
amplification and analog signal processing; and the
use of microcomputers for digital sampling and display.
Lectures cover principles explored in the laboratory
exercises; construction, response and signal
to noise of electronic transducers and actuators; and
design of circuits for sensing and controlling physical
quantities. Also listed as Bioengineering C145L.
(F) Derenzo
C145M. Introductory Microcomputer Interfacing
Laboratory. (3) Two hours of lecture and three hours
of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 40, Computer
Science 61B or a working knowledge of ANSI C programming
or consent of instructor. Laboratory exercises
constructing basic interfacing circuits and writing
20-100 line C programs for data acquisition, storage,
analysis, display, and control. Use of the IBM PC with
microprogrammable digital counter/timer, parallel I/O
port. Circuit components include anti-aliasing filters, the
S/H amplifier, A/D and D/A converters. Exercises
include effects of aliasing in periodic sampling, fast
Fourier transforms of basic waveforms, the use of the
Hanning filter for leakage reduction, Fourier analysis of
the human voice, digital filters, and control using
Fourier deconvolution. Lectures cover principles
explored in the lab exercises and design of microcomputer-based
systems for data acquisitions, analy -
sis, and control. Also listed as Bioengineering C145M.
(SP) Derenzo
C145O. Laboratory in the Mechanics of Organisms.
(3) Students will receive no credit for C145O
after taking Integrative Biology 135L. Six hours of laboratory
and one hour of discussion per week, plus
one field trip. Introduction to laboratory and field study
of the biomechanics of animals and plants using fundamental
biomechanical techniques and equipment.
Course has a series of rotations involving students in
experiments demonstrating how solid and fluid
mechanics can be used to discover the way in which
diverse organisms move and interact with their physical
environment. The laboratories emphasize sampling
methodology, experimental design, and statistical
interpretation of results. Latter third of course devoted
to independent research projects. Written reports and
class presentation of project results are required. Also
listed as Integrative Biology C135L and Bioengineering
C136L. (SP) Staff, Full
147. Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems
(MEMS). (3) Three hours of lecture and one
hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites: Physics
7B. This senior-level course will introduce undergraduate
students to the rapidly expanding, multidisciplinary
field of microfabricated systems. It will
present the fundamentals of micromachining and
microfabrication techniques (including photolithography,
thin film, and bulk etching and deposition and
polymer fabrication). The course will then delve into the
fundamentals of transduction mechanisms, particularly
as they apply to sensing and transduction. Capacitive,
piezoresistive, thermal fundamentals will be covered;
basic microfluidics will be covered. The course
will have a heavy emphasis on multi-domain analysis
(i.e., thermal-mechanical, electromechanical analysis).
Armed with these basic concepts, the course
will cover design and analysis of microfabricated sensors
and actuators using these techniques. Many
examples of existing devices and their applications
will be reviewed. (F,SP) Maharbiz
C149. Introduction to Embedded Systems. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 20; Computer Science 61C; Computer
Science 70 or Math 55. Formerly 124. This
course introduces students to the basics of models,
analysis tools, and control for embedded systems
operating in real time. Students learn how to combine
physical processes with computation. Topics include
models of computation, control, analysis and verification,
interfacing with the physical world, mapping
to platforms, and distributed embedded systems. The
course has a strong laboratory component, with
emphasis on a semester-long sequence of projects.
Also listed as Computer Science C149. (F,SP) Lee,
Seshia, Tomlin
192. Mechatronic Design Laboratory. (4) One and
one-half hours of lecture and 10 hours of laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: 120, Computer Science 61B
or 61C, 150 or equivalent. Design project course,
focusing on application of theoretical principles in
 electrical engineering to control of a small-scale
system, such as a mobile robot. Small teams of students
will design and construct a mechatronic system
incorporating sensors, actuators, and intelligence.
(SP) Fearing
194. Special Topics. (1-4) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One to four hours of lecture/discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Consent of
instructor. Topics will vary semester to semester. See
the Electrical Engineering announcements. (F,SP) Staff
H196A-H196B. Senior Honors Thesis Research.
(1-4;1-4) Individual research. Prerequisites: Open only
to students in the Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science Honors Program. Thesis work under
the supervision of a faculty member. A minimum of
four units must be taken; the units may be distributed
between one and two semesters in any way. To obtain
credit a satisfactory thesis must be submitted at the
end of the two semesters to the Electrical and Engineering
and Computer Science department archive.
Students who complete four units and a thesis in
one semester receive a letter grade at the end of
H196A. Students who do not, receive an IP in H196A
and must enroll in H196B. (F,SP) Staff
198. Directed Group Study for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit.
To vary with section. Must be taken on a passed/not
passed basis. Prerequisites: 2.0 GPA or better; 60
units completed. Group study of selected topics in
electrical engineering, usually relating to new developments.
(F,SP) Staff
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Enrollment
is restricted; see the Introduction to Courses
and Curricula section of this catalog. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed
basis. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor and major
adviser. Supervised independent study. Enrollment
restrications apply. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
C201. Strategic Computing and Communications
Technology. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering, business
administration, information management and
systems, or consent of instructor. Factors strongly
impacting the success of new computing and communications
products and services (based on underlying
technologies such as electronics and software)
in commercial applications. Technology trends and
limits, economics, standardization, intellectual property,
government policy, and industrial organization.
Strategies to manage the design and marketing of
successful products and services. (F,SP) Staff
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 241
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
W prefix=online course
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:40 PM Page 241
242 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
210. Applied Electromagnetic Theory. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 117, or
Physics 110A, 110B. Formerly 210A-210B. Advanced
treatment of classical electromagnetic theory with
engineering applications. Boundary value problems
in electrostatics. Applications of Maxwell’s Equations
to the study of waveguides, resonant cavities, optical
fiber guides, Gaussian optics, diffraction, scattering,
and antennas. (F) Staff
C213. Soft X-Rays and Extreme Ultraviolet Radiation.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Physics 110, 137; and Mathematics 53, 54 or
equivalent. Formerly El Engineering 290G. This course
will explore modern developments in the physics and
applications of soft X-rays. It begins with a review of
electromagnetic radiation at short wavelengths including
dipole radiation, scattering and refractive index,
using a semi-classical atomic model. Subject matter
will include the generation of X-rays with laboratory
tubes, synchrotron radiation, laser-plasma sources,
X-ray lasers, and black body radiation. Concepts of
spatial and temporal coherence will be discussed.
Also listed as Applied Science and Technology C210.
(SP) Staff
217. Microwave Circuits. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 117 and 140 or equivalent.
Techniques of analog circuit technology in the high-frequency
regime above 1 GHz. Transmission lines and
distributed circuit elements; S-parameter design of
high-frequency active circuits; computer-aided analysis
and design. Emphasis on design of planar high-frequency
integrated circuits employing CMOS and SiGe
technology. Circuit building blocks for broadband wired
and wireless communication will be emphasized
including oscillators, low-noise amplifiers, and power
amplifiers. Offered alternate years. (SP) Niknejad
219A. Numerical Simulation and Modeling. (4) Four
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of
instructor; a course in linear algebra and on circuits is
very useful. Numerical simulation and modeling are
enabling technologies that pervade science and engineering.
This course provides a detailed introduction
to the fundamental principles of these technologies and
their translation to engineering practice. The course
emphasizes hands-on programming in MATLAB and
application to several domains, including circuits, nanotechnology,
and biology. (F,SP) Roychowdhury
219B. Logic Synthesis. (4) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor. The course covers the fun -
damental techniques for the design and analysis of
digital circuits. The goal is to provide a detailed understanding
of basic logic synthesis and analysis algorithms,
and to enable students to apply this knowledge
in the design of digital systems and EDA tools. The
course will present combinational circuit optimization
(two-level and multi-level synthesis), sequential circuit
optimization (state encoding, retiming), timing
analysis, testing, and logic verification. (F,SP) Staff
219C. Computer-Aided Verification. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor;
Computer Science 170 is recommended. Introduction
to the theory and practice of formal methods
for the design and analysis of systems, with a focus on
automated algorithmic techniques. Covers selected
topics in computational logic and automata theory
including formal models of reactive systems, temporal
logic, model checking, and automated theorem proving.
Applications in hardware and software verification,
analysis of embedded, real-time, and hybrid
systems, computer security, synthesis, planning, constraint
solving, and other areas will be explored as
time permits. Offered alternate years. (F,SP) Seshia
C219D. Concurrent Models of Computation. (3)
Course may be repeated for credit with consent of
instructor. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Graduate standing. Theory and practice of
 concurrent models of computation (MoCs) with applications
to software systems, embedded systems, and
cyber-physical systems. Analysis for boundedness,
deadlock, and determinacy; formal semantics (fixed
point semantics and metric-space models); composition;
heterogeneity; and model-based design. MoCs
covered may include process networks, threads,
 message passing, synchronous/reactive, dataflow,
 rendezvous, time-triggered, discrete events, and
 continuous time. Also listed as Computer Science
C219D. (F,SP) Lee
221A. Linear System Theory. (4) Three hours of lecture
and two hours of recitation per week. Prerequisites:
120; Mathematics 110 recommended. Basic
system concepts; state-space and I/O representation.
Properties of linear systems. Controllability, observability,
minimality, state and output-feedback. Stability.
Observers. Characteristic polynomial. Nyquist test.
(F,SP) Staff
222. Nonlinear Systems—Analysis, Stability, and
Control. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
221A (may be taken concurrently). Basic
graduate course in nonlinear systems. Second Order
systems. Numerical solution methods, the describing
function method, linearization. Stability—direct and
indirect methods of Lyapunov. Applications to the Lure
problem—Popov, circle criterion. Input-Output stability.
Additional topics include bifurcations of dynamical
systems, introduction to the “geometric” theory of
control for nonlinear systems, passivity concepts, and
dissipative dynamical systems. (SP) Staff
223. Stochastic Systems: Estimation and Control.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
226A (which students are encouraged to take concurrently).
Parameter and state estimation. System
identification. Nonlinear filtering. Stochastic control.
Adaptive control. (SP) Staff
224A. Digital Communications. (4) Four hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
120 and 126, or equivalent. Formerly 224.
Introduction to the basic principles of the design and
analysis of modern digital communication systems.
Topics include source coding; channel coding; baseband
and passband modulation techniques; receiver
design; channel equalization; information theoretic
techniques; block, convolutional, and trellis coding
techniques; multiuser communications and spread
spectrum; multi-carrier techniques and FDM; carrier
and symbol synchronization. Applications to design
of digital telephone modems, compact disks, and
 digital wireless communication systems are illustrated.
The concepts are illustrated by a sequence of
MATLAB exercises. (F,SP) Staff
224B. Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
121, 226A, or equivalent. Introduction of the fundamentals
of wireless communication. Modeling of the
wireless multipath fading channel and its basic physical
parameters. Coherent and noncoherent reception.
Diversity techniques over time, frequency, and
space. Spread spectrum communication. Multiple
access and interference management in wireless
 networks. Frequency re-use, sectorization. Multiple
access techniques: TDMA, CDMA, OFDM. Capacity
of wireless channels. Opportunistic communication.
Multiple antenna systems: spatial multiplexing, spacetime
codes. Examples from existing wireless standards.
(SP) Tse
225A. Digital Signal Processing. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 123 and 126 or
solid background in stochastic processes. Advanced
techniques in signal processing. Stochastic signal processing,
parametric statistical signal models, and
adaptive filterings. Application to spectral estimation,
speech and audio coding, adaptive equalization, noise
cancellation, echo cancellation, and linear prediction.
(SP) Gastpar, Bahai
225B. Digital Image Processing. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 123. 2-D sequences
and systems, separable systems, projection slice thm,
reconstruction from projections and partial Fourier
information, Z transform, different equations, recursive
computability, 2D DFT and FFT, 2D FIR filter
design; human eye, perception, psychophysical vision
properties, photometry and colorimetry, optics and
image systems; image enhancement, image restoration,
geometrical image modification, morphological
image processing, halftoning, edge detection, image
compression; scalar quantization, lossless coding,
huffman coding, arithmetic coding dictionary techniques,
waveform and transform coding DCT, KLT,
Hadammard, multiresolution coding pyramid, subband
coding, Fractal coding, vector quantization, motion
estimation and compensation, standards; JPEG,
MPEG, H.xxx, pre- and post-processing, scalable
image and video coding, image and video communication
over noisy channels. (F,SP) Zakhor
225D. Audio Signal Processing in Humans and
Machines. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
123 or equivalent; Statistics 200A or equivalent;
or graduate standing and consent of instructor.
Introduction to relevant signal processing and basics
of pattern recognition. Introduction to coding, synthesis,
and recognition. Models of speech and music production
and perception. Signal processing for speech
analysis. Pitch perception and auditory spectral analysis
with applications to speech and music. Vocoders
and music synthesizers. Statistical speech recognition,
including introduction to Hidden Markov Model
and Neural Network approaches. (SP) Morgan
C225E. Principles of Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
(3) Student will receive no credit for Electrical
Engineering C225E after taking Bioengineering 265.
Three hours of lecture per week. Fundamentals of
MRI including signal-to-noise ratio, resolution, and
contrast as dictated by physics, pulse sequences, and
instrumentation. Image reconstruction via 2D FFT
methods. Fast imaging reconstruction via convolution-back
projection and gridding methods and FFTs.
Hardware for modern MRI scanners including main
field, gradient fields, RF coils, and shim supplies. Software
for MRI including imaging methods such as 2D
FT, RARE, SSFP, spiral and echo planar imaging
methods. Fundamental tradeoffs of tailoring hardware
and pulse sequences to specific applications. The
modern MRI “toolbox” will be introduced, including
selecting a slice or volume, fast imaging methods to
avoid image artifacts due to physiologic motion, and
methods for functional imaging. Also listed as Bioengineering
C265. (F,SP) Conolly, Lustig
226A. Random Processes in Systems. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 120 and Statistics 200A or equivalent.
Formerly 226. Probability, random variables and their
convergence, random processes. Filtering of wide
sense stationary processes, spectral density, Wiener
and Kalman filters. Markov processes and Markov
chains. Gaussian, birth and death, poisson and shot
noise processes. Elementary queueing analysis.
Detection of signals in Gaussian and shot noise, elementary
parameter estimation. (F) Anantharam
227A. Introduction to Convex Optimization. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
54 and Statistics 2 or equivalents. Convex
optimization is a class of nonlinear optimization problems
where the objective to be minimized, and the
constraints, are both convex. Contrarily to the more
classical linear programming framework, convex programs
often go unrecognized, and this is a pity since
a large class of convex optimization problems can
now be efficiently solved. In addition, it is possible to
address hard, non-convex problems (such as “combinatorial
optimization” problems) using convex approximations
that are more efficient than classical linear
ones. The course covers some convex optimization
theory and algorithms, and describes various applications
arising in engineering design, machine learning
and statistics, finance, and operations research.
The course includes laboratory assignments, which
consist of hands-on experiments with the optimization
software CVX, and a discussion section. (F,SP) El
Ghaoui, Wainwright
C227A. Introduction to Convex Optimization. (4)
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
54 and Statistics 2 or equivalents. Convex
optimization is a class of nonlinear optimization problems
where the objectives to be minimized, and the
constraints, are both convex. Contrary to the more
classical linear programming framework, convex pro35492
B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:40 PM Page 242
grams often go unrecognized, and this is a pity since
a large class of convex optimization problems can
now be efficiently solved. In addition, it is possible to
address hard, non-convex problems (such as “combinatorial
optimization” problems) using convex approximations
that are more efficient than classical linear
ones. The course covers some convex optimization
theory and algorithms, and describes various applications
arising in engineering design, machine learning
and statistics, finance, and operations research.
The course includes laboratory assignments, which
consist of hands-on experience. Also listed as Industrial
Engin and Oper Research C227A. (F,SP) El
Ghaoul, Wainwright
227B. Convex Optimization and Approximation.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
227A or consent of instructor. Convex optimization
as a systematic approximation tool for hard decision
problems. Approximations of combinatorial optimization
problems, of stochastic programming problems, of
robust optimization problems (i.e., with optimization
problems with unknown but bounded data), of optimal
control problems. Quality estimates of the resulting
approximation. Applications in robust engineering
design, statistics, control, finance, data mining, operations
research. (F) El-Ghaoui
C227B. Convex Optimization and Approximation.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
227A or C227A or Industrial Engineering and Operations
Research C227A or consent of instructor. Convex
optimization as a systematic approximation tool for
hard decision problems. Approximations of combinatorial
optimization problems, of stochastic programming
problems, of robust optimization problems (i.e.,
with optimization problems with unknown but bounded
data), of optimal control problems. Quality estimates of
the resulting approximation. Applications in robust
engineering design, statistics, control, finance, data
mining, operations research. Also listed as Industrial
Engin and Oper Research C227B. (F,SP) El Ghaoui
228A. High-Speed Communications Networks. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 122,
226A (may be taken concurrently). Descriptions,
models, and approaches to the design and management
of networks. Optical transmission and switching
technologies are described and analyzed using
deterministic, stochastic, and simulation models. FDDI,
DQDB, SMDS, Frame Relay, ATM, networks, and
SONET. Applications demanding high-speed communication.
(F) Staff
229A. Information Theory and Coding. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 226 recommended,
Statistics 200A or equivalent. Formerly 229.
Fundamental bounds of Shannon theory and their
application. Source and channel coding theorems.
Galois field theory, algebraic error-correction codes.
Private- and public-key cryptographic systems. Offered
alternate years. (SP) Anantharam, Tse
229B. Error Control Coding. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 126 or equivalent (some
familiarity with basic probability). Prior exposure to
information theory not necessary. Error control codes
are an integral part of most communication and recording
systems where they are primarily used to provide
resiliency to noise. In this course, we will cover the
basics of error control coding for reliable digital transmission
and storage. We will discuss the major classes
of codes that are important in practice, including Reed
Muller codes, cyclic codes, Reed Solomon codes,
convolutional codes, concatenated codes, turbo codes,
and low density parity check codes. The relevant background
material from finite field and polynomial algebra
will be developed as part of the course. Overview
of topics: binary linear block codes; Reed Muller codes;
Galois fields; linear block codes over a finite field;
cyclic codes; BCH and Reed Solomon codes; convolutional
codes and trellis based decoding, message
passing decoding algorithms; trellis based soft decision
decoding of block codes; turbo codes; low density
parity check codes. (SP) Anatharam
230. Solid State Electronics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 131; Physics 137B. Crystal
structure and symmetries. Energy-band theory.
Cyclotron resonance. Tensor effective mass. Statistics
of electronic state population. Recombination theory.
Carrier transport theory. Interface properties. Optical
processes and properties. (F,SP) Bokor, Salahuddin
231. Solid State Devices. (4) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
130 or equivalent. Physical principles and operational
characteristics of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is
on MOS field-effect transistors and their behaviors
dictated by present and probable future technologies.
Metal-oxide-semiconductor systems, short-channel
and high field effects, device modeling, and impact
on analog, digital circuits. (SP) Subramanian, King
Liu, Salahuddin
232. Lightwave Devices. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 136 or equivalent; background
in semiconductor physics. Principle of semiconductor
lasers. Modulation dynamics. Single
frequency lasers. Fundamental AM and FM noise
properties, linewidth. Tunable semiconductor lasers.
Quantum well lasers. Electrooptic modulators and
switches. Detectors. Integrated optoelectronic circuits.
Optical amplifiers-semiconductor and Erbium fiber.
Low coherence sources-superluminescent diodes.
Tunable optical filters. (F) Wu
233. Lightwave Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 120 and 121 or equivalent;
136 recommended. Transmission properties of optical
fibers: dispersion, attenuation, nonlinear effects (solitons).
Direct-detection systems: analog and digital
modulation, transmitter design, receiver design, noise
properties of single and multimode fiber links, dependence
on source coherence, subcarrier and multichannel
CATV analog transmission issues the role of
optical fiber amplifiers. Coherent communication: FM
noise and modulation properties of laser diodes, quantum
limited detection, homodyne and heterodyne
detection of various formats, laser linewidth requirements,
diversity issues. Lightwave networks: WDMA,
FDMA, subcarrier, TDMA, and CDMA, relative merits.
Topological issues: multihop (sore-and-forward) and
hot-potato routing, the role of optical switching. Optical
network access protocols. Optical interconnection in
high-speed circuit modules and computers. (SP) Staff
C235. Nanoscale Fabrication. (4) Three hours of
lecture and one hour of discussion per week. This
course discusses various top-down and bottom-up
approaches to synthesizing and processing nanostructured
materials. The topics include fundamentals
of self assembly, nano-imprint lithography, electron
beam lithography, nanowire and nanotube synthesis,
quantum dot synthesis (strain patterned and colloidal),
postsynthesis modification (oxidation, doping, diffusion,
surface interactions, and etching techniques).
In addition, techniques to bridging length scales such
as heterogeneous integration will be discussed. We will
discuss new electronic, optical, thermal, mechanical,
and chemical properties brought forth by the very
small sizes. Also listed as Nanoscale Science and
Engineering C203. (F) Chang-Hasnain
236A. Quantum and Optical Electronics. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 117A,
Physics 137A or equivalent. Interaction of radiation
with atomic and semiconductor systems, density matrix
treatment, semiclassical laser theory (Lamb’s), laser
resonators, specific laser systems, laser dynamics,
Q-switching and mode-locking, noise in lasers and
optical amplifiers. Nonlinear optics, phase-conjugation,
electrooptics, acoustooptics and magnetooptics,
coherent optics, stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering.
Offered alternate years. (F,SP) Staff
C239. Partially Ionized Plasmas. (3) Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: Upper division course
in electromagnetics or fluid dynamics. Formerly 239.
Introduction to partially ionized, chemically reactive
plasmas, including collisional processes, diffusion,
sources, sheaths, boundaries, and diagnostics. DC,
RF, and microwave discharges. Applications to
plasma-assisted materials processing and to plasma
wall interactions. Also listed as Applied Science and
Technology C239. Offered alternate years. (SP) Staff
240. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuits. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 140.
Analysis and optimized design of monolithic operational
amplifiers and wide-band amplifiers; methods
of achieving wide-band amplification, gain-bandwidth
considerations; analysis of noise in integrated circuits
and low noise design. Precision passive elements,
analog switches, amplifiers and comparators, voltage
reference in NMOS and CMOS circuits, Serial, successive-approximation,
and parallel analog-to-digital
converters. Switched-capacitor and CCD filters. Applications
to codecs, modems. (F,SP) Staff
241. Advanced Digital Integrated Circuits. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 141. Analysis
and design of MOS and bipolar large-scale
 integrated circuits at the circuit level. Fabrication processes,
device characteristics, parasitic effects static
and dynamic digital circuits for logic and memory functions.
Calculation of speed and power consumption
from layout and fabrication parameters. ROM, RAM,
EEPROM circuit design. Use of SPICE and other computer
aids. (SP) Nikolic, Rabaey
242. Advanced Integrated Circuits for Communications.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
142, 240. Analysis, evaluation and design
of present-day integrated circuits for communications
application, particularly those for which nonlinear
response must be included. MOS, bipolar and
BICMOS circuits, audio and video power amplifiers,
optimum performance of near-sinusoidal oscillators
and frequency-translation circuits. Phase-locked
loop ICs, analog multipliers and voltage-controlled
oscillators; advanced components for telecommunication
circuits. Use of new CAD tools and systems.
(F,SP) Niknejad
243. Advanced IC Processing and Layout. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 143 and
either 140 or 141. The key processes for the fabrication
of integrated circuits. Optical, X-ray, and e-beam
lithography, ion implantation, oxidation and diffusion.
Thin film deposition. Wet and dry etching and ion
milling. Effect of phase and defect equilibria on process
control. (SP) Staff
244. Fundamental Algorithms for Systems Modeling,
Analysis, and Optimization. (4) Four hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Graduate standing.
The modeling, analysis, and optimization of complex
systems requires a range of algorithms and
design software. This course reviews the fundamental
techniques underlying the design methodology for
complex systems, using integrated circuit design as
example. Topics include design flows, discrete and
continuous models and algorithms, and strategies for
implementing algorithms efficiently and correctly in
software. Laboratory assignments and a class project
will expose students to state-of-the-art. (F,SP)
Keutzer, Lee, Roychowdhury, Seshia
C245. Introduction to MEMS Design. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: Graduate standing in engineering or
science; undergraduates with consent of instructor.
Physics, fabrication, and design of micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS). Micro- and nanofabrication
processes, including silicon surface and bulk
micromachining and non-silicon micromachining. Integration
strategies and assembly processes. Micro -
sensor and microactuator devices: electrostatic,
piezoresistive, piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic transduction.
Electronic position-sensing circuits and electrical
and mechanical noise. CAD for MEMS. Design
project is required. Also listed as Mechanical Engineering
C218. (F,SP) Nguyen, Pister
C246. Parametric and Optimal Design of MEMS.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Mechanical Engineering 119 and Mechanical Engineering
C218/Electrical Engineering C245 are highly
recommended but not mandatory. Parametric design
and optimal design of MEMS. Emphasis on design,
not fabrication. Analytic solution of MEMS design problems
to determine the dimensions of MEMS structures
for specified function. Trade-off of various
performance requirements despite conflicting design
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 243
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
W prefix=online course
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
35492 B-Cat_AP:B-Cat Template.QXD 5/25/11 2:40 PM Page 243
244 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
requirements. Structures include flexure systems,
accelerometers, and rate sensors. Also listed as
Mechanical Engineering C219. (SP) Lin, Pisano
247. Analysis and Design of VLSI Analog-Digital
Interface Integrated Circuits. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 140. Architectural and
circuit level design and analysis of integrated analogto-digital
and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS
and BiCMOS VLSI technology. Analog-digital converters,
digital-analog converters, sample/hold amplifiers,
continuous and switched-capacitor filters. RF
integrated electronics including synthesizers, LNA’s,
and baseband processing. Low power mixed signal
design. Data communications functions including clock
recovery. CAD tools for analog design including simulation
and synthesis. (F,SP) Boser
249. Embedded System Design: Models, Validation,
and Synthesis. (4) Four hours of lecture and
two hours of laboratory/discussion per week. Prerequisites:
Background in SoC design, operating systems
and compilers, or consent of instructor. Principles
of embedded system design. Focus on design
methodologies and foundations. Platform-based design
and communication-based design and their relationship
with design time, re-use, and performance.
Models of computation and their use in design capture,
manipulation, verification, and synthesis. Mapping into
architecture and system platforms. Performance estimation.
Scheduling and real-time requirements. Synchronous
languages and time-triggered protocols to
simplify the design process. Simulation techniques
for highly programmable platforms. Synthesis and
successive refinement: meta-model of computation.
Use of design tools and analysis of their capabilities
and limitations: Ptolemy, POLIS, Metropolis, VCC,
Co-ware. (F) Sangiovanni-Vincentelli
290. Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering.
Course may be repeated for credit. One to three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
The 290 courses cover current topics of research
interest in electrical engineering. The course content
may vary from semester to semester.
290A. Advanced Topics in Computer-Aided Design.
(1-3)
290B. Advanced Topics in Solid State Devices. (1-3)
290C. Advanced Topics in Circuit Design. (1-3)
290E. Advanced Topics in Electromagnetics and
 Plasmas. (1-3)
290F. Advanced Topics in Photonics. (1-3)
290H. Advanced Topics in Semiconductor Manufacturing.
(1-3)
290N. Advanced Topics in System Theory. (1-3)
290O. Advanced Topics in Control. (1-3)
290P. Advanced Topics in Bioelectronics. (1-3)
290Q. Advanced Topics in Communication Networks.
(1-3)
290S. Advanced Topics in Communications and Information
Theory. (1-3)
290T. Advanced Topics in Signal Processing. (1-3)
290Y. Organic Materials in Electronics. (3) Prerequisites:
130; undergraduate general chemistry. Organic
materials are seeing increasing application in electronics
applications. This course will provide an
overview of the properties of the major classes of
organic materials with relevance to electronics. Students
will study the technology, physics, and chemistry
of their use in the three most rapidly growing major
applications—energy conversion/generation devices
(fuel cells and photovoltaics), organic light-emitting
diodes, and organic transistors. (F,SP) Subramanian
C291. Control and Optimization of Distributed
Parameters Systems. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week. Distributed systems and PDE models of
 physical phenomena (propagation of waves, network
traffic, water distribution, fluid mechanics, electromagnetism,
blood vessels, beams, road pavement,
structures, etc.). Fundamental solution methods for
PDEs: separation of variables, self-similar solutions,
characteristics, numerical methods, spectral methods.
Stability analysis. Adjoint-based optimization.
Lyapunov stabilization. Differential flatness. Viability
control. Hamilton-Jacobi-based control. Also listed as
Civil and Environmental Engineering C291F and
Mechanical Engineering C236. (SP) Staff
C291E. Hybrid Systems and Intelligent Control.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Formerly 291E.
Analysis of hybrid systems formed by the interaction of
continuous time dynamics and discrete-event controllers.
Discrete-event systems models and language
descriptions. Finite-state machines and automata.
Model verification and control of hybrid systems.
Signal-to-symbol conversion and logic controllers.
Adaptive, neural, and fuzzy-control systems. Applications
to robotics and Intelligent Vehicle and Highway
Systems (IVHS). Also listed as Mechanical Engineering
C290S. Staff
297. Field Studies in Electrical Engineering. (1-12)
Course may be repeated for credit. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Supervised experience in off-campus companies
relevant to specific aspects and applications of
electrical engineering. Written report required at the
end of the semester. (F,SP) Staff
298. Group Studies, Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit. One to four
hours of lectures per unit. Section 1-40 to be graded
on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis. Sections 41-
49 to be graded on a letter-grade basis. Advanced
study in various subjects through special seminars
on topics to be selected each year, informal group
studies of special problems, group participation in
comprehensive design problems, or group research on
complete problems for analysis and experimentation.
(F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Research. (1-12) Course may be
repeated for credit. Independent, individual study or
investigation. Investigation of problems in electrical
engineering. (F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral
degree. Independent study, in consultation with faculty
member. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Individual study in consultation with the
major field adviser, intended to provide an opportunity
for qualified students to prepare themselves for the
various examinations required of candidates for
the Ph.D. (and other doctoral degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
301. Teaching Techniques for Electrical Engineering.
(1) One and one-half hours of seminar per
week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Graduate standing. Weekly seminars
and discussions of effective teaching techniques.
Use of educational objectives, alternative forms of
instruction, and special techniques for teaching key
concepts and techniques in electrical engineering.
Student and self-evaluation. Course is intended to
orient new graduate student instructors to teaching
in the Electrical Engineering department at Berkeley.
(F) Staff