10. Introduction to Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. (2) Lecture, two hours. Overview of ﬂuid mechanics, heat and mass transfer, manufacturing and design, microelectromechanical systems, structural and solid mechanics, systems, dynamics and control. Careers in mechanical and aerospace engineering industry. P/NP grading.

15. Technical Communication for Engineers. (2) Lecture, two hours; outside study, four hours. Requisite: English Composition 3. Understanding writing process. Determining the purpose. Prewriting. Principles of organizing technical information. Eliminating unnecessary words, structuring paragraphs clearly, structuring effective sentences. Writing abstracts, introductions, and conclusions. Drafting and revising coherent documents. Writing collaboratively. Letter grading.

20. Programming with Numerical Methods Applications. (2) Lecture, two hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, two hours. Requisites: Mathematics 31A, 31B. Introduction to programming with MATLAB. Applications to numerical methods used in engineering. Letter grading.

94. Introduction to Computer-Aided Design and Drafting. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours. Fundamentals of computer graphics and twoand three-dimensional modeling on computer-aided design and drafting systems. Students use one or more on-line computer systems to design and display various objects. Letter grading.

Upper Division Courses

101. Statics and Strength of Materials. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: Mathematics 31A, 31B, Physics 1A. Review of vector representation of forces, resultant force and moment, equilibrium of concurrent and nonconcurrent forces. Determinate and indeterminate force systems. Area moments and products of inertia. Support reactions and free-body diagrams for simple models of mechanical and aerospace structures. Internal forces in beams, shear and moment diagrams. Cauchy’s stress and linear strain components in solids, equilibrium equations, Hooke’s law for isotropic solids. Saint Venant’s problems of extension, bending, ﬂexure, and torsion. Deﬂection of symmetric beams. Axial and hoop stresses in thin-walled pressure vessels. Letter grading.

102. Mechanics of Particles and Rigid Bodies. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: Mathematics 33A, Physics 1A. Newtonian mechanics (statics and dynamics) of particles and rigid bodies. Fundamental concepts of mechanics. Statics, kinematics, and kinetics of particles and rigid bodies. Impulse/momentum and work/ energy relationships. Applications. Letter grading.

103. Elementary Fluid Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: Mathematics 32B, 33A, Physics 1B. Introductory course dealing with application of principles of mechanics to ﬂow of compressible and incompressible ﬂuids. Letter grading.

M105A. Introduction to Engineering Thermodynamics. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M105A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Chemistry 20B, Mathematics 32B. Phenomenological thermodynamics. Concepts of equilibrium, temperature, and reversibility. First law and concept of energy; second law and concept of entropy. Equations of state and thermodynamic properties. Engineering applications of these principles in analysis and design of closed and open systems. Letter grading.

105D. Transport Phenomena. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, Mathematics 32B, 33B. Transport phenomena; heat conduction, mass species diffusion, convective heat and mass transfer, and radiation. Engineering applications in thermal and environmental control. Letter grading. 131A. Intermediate Heat Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 20, 105D, 182A. Steady conduction: two-sided, twoended, tapered, and circular ﬁns; buried cylinders, thick ﬁns. Transient conduction: slabs, cylinders, products. Convection: transpiration, laminar pipe ﬂow, ﬁlm condensation, boundary layers, dimensional analysis, working correlation, surface radiation. Two-stream heat exchangers. Elements of thermal design. Letter grading.

131AL. Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 157. Experimental study of physical phenomena and engineering systems using modern data acquisition and processing techniques. Experiments include studies of heat transfer phenomena and testing of a cooling tower, heat exchanger, and internal combustion engine. Students take and analyze data and discuss physical phenomena. Letter grading.

132A. Mass Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131A. Principles of mass transfer by diffusion and convection. Simultaneous heat and mass transfer. Analysis of evaporative and transpiration cooling, combustion, and catalysis. Mass exchangers, including automobile catalytic converters, precipitators, ﬁlters, scrubbers, humidiﬁers, and cooling towers. Letter grading.

133A. Engineering Thermodynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, 105D. Applications of thermodynamic principles to engineering processes. Energy conversion systems. Rankine cycle and other cycles, refrigeration, psychrometry, reactive and nonreactive ﬂuid ﬂow systems. Letter grading.

133AL. Power Conversion Thermodynamics Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: courses 133A, 157. Experimental study of power conversion and heat transfer systems using state-of-the-art plant process instrumentation and equipment. Experiments include studies of thermodynamic operating characteristics of an actual Brayton cycle, Rankine cycle, compressive refrigeration unit, and absorption refrigeration unit. Letter grading.

134. Design and Operation of Thermal Hydraulic Power Systems. (4) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, three hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 133A, 133AL. Thermal hydraulic design, maintenance and operation of power systems, gas turbines, steam turbines, centrifugal refrigeration units, absorption refrigeration units, compressors, valves and piping systems, and instrumentation and control systems. Letter grading.

136. Thermal Hydraulic Design of Nuclear and Other Power Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Designed for seniors. Thermal hydraulic design of nuclear and other power systems, power generation and heat removal, power cycle, thermal hydraulic component design, overall plant design, steady state and transient operation. Letter grading.

CM140. Introduction to Biomechanics. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering CM140.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 102 (or Civil Engineering 108), 156A. Introduction to mechanical functions of human body; skeletal adaptations to optimize load transfer, mobility, and function. Dynamics and kinematics. Fluid mechanics applications. Heat and mass transfer. Power generation. Laboratory simulations and tests. Concurrently scheduled with course CM240. Letter grading.

150A. Intermediate Fluid Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 20, 103, 182A. Basic equations governing ﬂuid motion. Fundamental solutions of Navier/Stokes equations. Lubrication theory. Elementary potential ﬂow theory. Boundary layers. Turbulent ﬂow in pipes and boundary layers. Compressible ﬂow: normal shocks, channel ﬂow with friction or heat addition. Letter grading.

150B. Aerodynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 103, 150A. Advanced aspects of potential ﬂow theory. Incompressible ﬂow around thin airfoils (C l C m ) and wings (lift, induced drag). Gas dynamics: oblique shocks, Prandtl/Meyer expansion. Linearized subsonic and supersonic ﬂow around thin airfoils and wings. Wave drag. Transonic ﬂow. Letter grading.

150C. Combustion Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, 105D. Chemical thermodynamics of ideal gas mixtures, premixed and diffusion ﬂames, explosions and detonations, combustion chemistry, high explosives. Combustion processes in rocket, turbine, and internal combustion engines; heating applications. Letter grading.

150P. Aircraft Propulsion Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A. Thermodynamic properties of gases, aircraft jet engine cycle analysis and component performance, component matching, advanced aircraft engine topics. Letter grading. 424 / Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

150R. Rocket Propulsion Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, 105D. Rocket propulsion concepts, including chemical rockets (liquid, gas, and solid propellants), hybrid rocket engines, electric (ion, plasma) rockets, nuclear rockets, and solar-powered vehicles. Current issues in launch vehicle technologies. Letter grading.

153A. Engineering Acoustics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for junior/ senior engineering majors. Fundamental course in acoustics; propagation of sound; sources of sound. Design of ﬁeld measurements. Estimation of jet and blade noise with design aspects. Letter grading.

154A. Preliminary Design of Aircraft. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 154S. Classical preliminary design of an aircraft, including weight estimation, performance and stability, and control consideration. Term assignment consists of preliminary design of a low-speed aircraft. Letter grading.

154B. Design of Aerospace Structures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 154A, 166A. Design of aircraft, helicopter, spacecraft, and related structures. External loads, internal stresses. Applied theory of thin-walled structures. Material selection, design using composite materials. Design for fatigue prevention and structural optimization. Field trips to aerospace companies. Letter grading.

154S. Flight Mechanics, Stability, and Control of Aircraft. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B. Aircraft performance, ﬂight mechanics, stability, and control; some basic ingredients needed for design of an aircraft. Effects of airplane ﬂexibility on stability derivatives. Letter grading.

155. Intermediate Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course

102. Axioms of Newtonian mechanics, generalized coordinates, Lagrange equation, variational principles; central force motion; kinematics and dynamics of a rigid body. Euler equations, motion of rotating bodies, oscillatory motion, normal coordinates, orthogonality relations. Letter grading.

156A. Strength of Materials. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 182A, Civil Engineering 108. Concepts of stress, strain, and material behavior. Stresses in loaded beams with symmetric and asymmetric cross sections. Torsion of cylinders and thin-walled structures, shear ﬂow. Stresses in pressure vessels, press-ﬁt and shrink-ﬁt problems, rotating shafts. Curved beams. Contact stresses. Strength and failure, plastic deformation, fatigue, elastic instability. Letter grading.

156B. Introduction to Elasticity. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 156A, 182A. Kinematics of deformation, strain displacement relations. Balance laws, stress tensor, principal stresses, equilibrium equations. Conservation of energy, strain energy function. Generalized Hook’s law, thermoplasticity and viscoelasticity. Stress calculation in cylinders and spheres. Plane elasticity, Airy’s stress function. Stress concentration problems at holes, corners, and crack tips. Letter grading.

157. Basic Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, 105D, Civil Engineering 108, Electrical Engineering 100. Methods of measurement of basic quantities and performance of basic experiments in heat transfer, ﬂuid mechanics, structures, and thermodynamics. Primary sensors, transducers, recording equipment, signal processing, and data analysis. Letter grading.

157A. Fluid Mechanics and Aerodynamics Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B, 157. Experimental illustration of important physical phenomena in area of ﬂuid mechanics/aerodynamics, as well as hands-on experience with design of experimental programs and use of modern experimental tools and techniques in the ﬁeld. Letter grading.

161A. Introduction to Astronautics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 102. Recommended: course 182A. Space environment of Earth, trajectories and orbits, step rockets and staging, two-body problem, orbital transfer and rendezvous, problem of three bodies, elementary perturbation theory, inﬂuence of Earth’s oblateness. Letter grading.

161B. Introduction to Space Technology. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended preparation: courses 102, 105D, 150P, 161A. Propulsion requirements for typical space missions, thermochemistry of propellants, internal ballistics, regenerative cooling, liquid propellant feed systems, POGO instability. Electric propulsion. Multistage rockets, separation dynamics. Satellite structures and materials, loads and vibrations. Thermal control of spacecraft. Letter grading.

161C. Spacecraft Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 161B. Coverage of preliminary design, by students, of a small spacecraft carrying a lightweight scientiﬁc payload with modest requirements for electric power, lifetime, and attitude stability. Students work in groups of three or four, with each student responsible primarily for a subsystem and for integration with the whole. Letter grading.

161D. Space Technology Hardware Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, three hours; outside study, seven hours. Recommended requisite or corequisite: course 161B. Design, by students, of hardware with applications to space technology. Designs are then built by HSSEAS professional machine shop and tested by the students. New project carried out each year. Letter grading.

162A. Introduction to Mechanisms and Mechanical Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 20, 102. Analysis and synthesis of mechanisms and mechanical systems. Kinematics, dynamics, and mechanical advantages of machinery. Displacement velocity and acceleration analyses of linkages. Fundamental law of gearing and various gear trains. Computer-aided mechanism design and analysis. Letter grading.

162B. Mechanical Product Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 94, 156A, 162A, 183, Electrical Engineering 110L. Lecture and laboratory (design) course involving modern design theory and methodology for development of mechanical products. Economics, marketing, manufacturability, quality, and patentability. Design considerations taught and applied to hands-on design project. Letter grading.

162C. Electromechanical System Design Laboratory. (4) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, eight hours; outside study, three hours. Requisite: course 162B. Laboratory and design course consisting of design, development, construction, and testing of complex mechanical and electromechanical systems. Assembled machine is instrumented and monitored for operational characteristics. Letter grading.

162M. Senior Mechanical Engineering Design. (4) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, six hours; outside study, ﬁve hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 133A, 162B, 169A, 171A. Must be taken in last two academic terms of students’ programs. Analytical course of a large engineering system. Design factors include functionality, efﬁciency, economy, safety, reliability, aesthetics, and social impact. Final report of engineering speciﬁcations and drawings to be presented by design teams. Letter grading.

163A. Introduction to Computer-Controlled Machines. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite or corequisite: course 171A. Modeling of computer-controlled machines, including electrical and electronic elements, mechanical elements, actuators, sensors, and overall electromechanical systems. Motion and command generation, servocontroller design, and computer/machine interfacing. Letter grading.

166A. Analysis of Flight Structures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Civil Engineering 108. Introduction to two-dimensional elasticity, stress-strain laws, yield and fatigue; bending of beams; torsion of beams; warping; torsion of thin-walled cross sections: shear ﬂow, shear-lag; combined bending torsion of thin-walled, stiffened structures used in aerospace vehicles; elements of plate theory; buckling of columns. Letter grading.

166C. Design of Composite Structures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 156A or 166A. History of composites, stressstrain relations for composite materials, bending and extension of symmetric laminates, failure analysis, design examples and design studies, buckling of composite components, nonsymmetric laminates, micromechanics of composites. Letter grading.

168. Introduction to Finite Element Technology. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: course 20, Civil Engineering 108, Mathematics 33A. Recommended: courses 94 or 184, 166A. Introduction to ﬁnite element method (FEM) and its matrix formulation of computer implementation of FEM concepts; practical use of FEM codes. Preprocessing and postprocessing techniques; graphics display capabilities; geometric and analysis modeling; interactive engineering systems; links with computer-aided design. Recent trends in FEM technology; design optimization. Term projects using FEM computer codes. Letter grading.

169A. Introduction to Mechanical Vibrations. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 102, 182A, Civil Engineering 108. Recommended: Electrical Engineering 102. Fundamentals of vibration theory and applications. Free, forced, and transient vibration of one and two degrees of freedom systems, including damping. Normal modes, coupling, and normal coordinates. Vibration isolation devices, vibrations of continuous systems. Letter grading.

171A. Introduction to Feedback and Control Systems: Dynamic Systems Control I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 181A or 182A or Electrical Engineering 102. Introduction to feedback principles, control systems design, and system stability. Modeling of physical systems in engineering and other ﬁelds; transform methods; controller design using Nyquist, Bode, and root locus methods; compensation; computer-aided analysis and design. Letter grading.

171B. Digital Control of Physical Systems. (4) (Formerly numbered 164.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 171A or Electrical Engineering 141. Analysis and design of digital control systems. Sampling theory. Z-transformation. Discrete-time system representation. Design using classical methods: performance speciﬁcations, root locus, frequency response, loop-shaping compensation. Design using state-space methods: state feedback, state estimator, state estimator feedback control. Simulation of sampled data systems and practical aspects: roundoff errors, sampling rate selection, computation delay. Letter grading. Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering / 425

172. Control System Design Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Requisite: course 171A. Application of frequency domain design techniques for control of mechanical systems. Successful controller design requires students to formulate performance measures for control problem, experimentally identify mechanical systems, and develop uncertainty descriptions for design models. Exploration of issues concerning model uncertainty and sensor/actuator placement. Students implement control designs on ﬂexible structures, rate gyroscope, and inverted pendulum. Detailed reports required. Letter grading.

174. Probability and Its Applications to Risk, Reliability, and Quality Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Introduction to probability theory; random variables, distributions, functions of random variables, models of failure of components, reliability, redundancy, complex systems, stressstrength models, fault tree analysis, statistical quality control by variables and by attributes, acceptance sampling. Letter grading.

M180. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M150 and Electrical Engineering M150.) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Corequisite: course M180L. Introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students design microfabrication processes capable of achieving desired MEMS device. Letter grading.

M180L. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Laboratory. (2) (Formerly numbered 180.) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M150L and Electrical Engineering M150L.) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, one hour. Corequisite: course M180. Hands-on introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) laboratory. Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students go through process of fabricating MEMS device. Letter grading.

181A. Complex Analysis and Integral Transforms. (4) (Formerly numbered 191A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 182A. Complex variables, analytic functions, conformal mapping, contour integrals, singularities, residues, Cauchy integrals; Laplace transform: properties, convolution, inversion; Fourier transform: properties, convolution, FFT, applications in dynamics, vibrations, structures, and heat conduction. Letter grading.

182A. Mathematics of Engineering. (4) (Formerly numbered 192A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: Mathematics 33A, 33B. Methods of solving ordinary differential equations in engineering. Review of matrix algebra. Solutions of systems of ﬁrst- and second-order ordinary differential equations. Introduction to Laplace transforms and their application to ordinary differential equations. Introduction to boundary value problems. Letter grading.

182B. Mathematics of Engineering. (4) (Formerly numbered 192B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 182A. Analytical methods for solving partial differential equations arising in engineering. Separation of variables, eigenvalue problems, Sturm/Liouville theory. Development and use of special functions. Representation by means of orthonormal functions; Galerkin method. Use of Green’s function and transform methods. Letter grading.

182C. Numerical Methods for Engineering Applications. (4) (Formerly numbered 192C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 20, 182A. Recommended: Electrical Engineering 103. Basic topics from numerical analysis having wide application in solution of practical engineering problems, computer arithmetic, and errors. Solution of linear and nonlinear systems. Algebraic eigenvalue problem. Least-square methods, numerical quadrature, and ﬁnite difference approximations. Numerical solution of initial and boundary value problems for ordinary and partial differential equations. Letter grading.

183. Introduction to Manufacturing Processes. (4) (Formerly numbered 193.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Materials Science

14. Mechanical behavior of materials. Manufacturing properties of metals. Surfaces of materials. Metal cutting, deformation processes, and casting. Joining and fastening. Nonconventional material-removal processes. Polymers, ceramics, and composites. Letter grading.

184. Introduction to Geometry Modeling. (4) (Formerly numbered 194.) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: courses 20, 94. Fundamentals in parametric curve and surface modeling, parametric spaces, blending functions, conics, splines and Bezier curve, coordinate transformations, algebraic and geometric form of surfaces, analytical properties of curve and surface, hands-on experience with CAD/CAM systems design and implementation. Letter grading.

185. Computer Numerical Control and Applications. (4) (Formerly numbered 195.) Laboratory, eight hours; outside study, four hours. Designed for juniors/seniors. Fundamentals of numerical control (NC) technology. Programming of computer numerical control (CNC) machines in NC codes and APT language and with CAD/CAM systems. NC postprocessors and distributed numerical control. Operation of CNC lathe and milling machines. Programming and machining of complex engineering parts. Letter grading.

188. Special Courses in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. (2 to 4) (Formerly numbered

198.) Lecture, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Special topics in mechanical and aerospace engineering for undergraduate students that are taught on experimental or temporary basis, such as courses taught by resident and visiting faculty members. May be repeated once for credit with topic or instructor change. P/NP or letter grading.

194. Research Group Seminars: Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, two hours. Designed for undergraduate students who are part of research group. Discussion of research methods and current literature in ﬁeld. Student presentation of projects in research specialty. May be repeated for credit. P/NP or letter grading.

199. Directed Research in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. (2 to 8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to juniors/seniors. Supervised individual research or investigation under guidance of faculty mentor. Culminating paper or project required. May be repeated for credit with school approval. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Ofﬁce of Academic and Student Affairs. Letter grading.

Graduate Courses

231A. Convective Heat Transfer Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 182B. Recommended: course 250A. Conservation equations for ﬂow of real ﬂuids. Analysis of heat transfer in laminar and turbulent, incompressible and compressible ﬂows. Internal and external ﬂows; free convection. Variable wall temperature; effects of variable ﬂuid properties. Analogies among convective transfer processes. Letter grading.

231B. Radiation Heat Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 105D. Radiative properties of materials and radiative energy transfer. Emphasis on fundamental concepts, including energy levels and electromagnetic waves as well as analytical methods for calculating radiative properties and radiation transfer in absorbing, emitting, and scattering media. Applications cover lasermaterial interactions in addition to traditional areas such as combustion and thermal insulation. Letter grading.

231C. Boiling and Condensation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 150A. Phenomenological theories of boiling. Hydrodynamic instability of liquid-vapor interfaces and their application to predict maximum and minimum heat ﬂuxes. Forced ﬂow boiling and boiling crisis in pipes. Pool and forced ﬂow boiling of liquid metals. Film and dropwise condensation. Letter grading.

231D. Application of Numerical Methods to Transport Phenomena. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 132A. Numerical techniques for solving selected problems in heat and mass transfer. Applications include free convection, boundary layer ﬂow, two-phase ﬂow, separated ﬂow, ﬂow in porous media. Effects of concentration and temperature gradients, chemical reactions, radiation, electric and magnetic ﬁelds. Letter grading.

231E. Two-Phase Flow Heat Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 150A. Generalized constitutive equations for various two-phase ﬂow regimes. Interfacial heat and mass transfer. Equilibrium and nonequilibrium ﬂow models. Two-phase ﬂow instability. One-dimensional wave propagation. Two-phase heat transfer applications: convective boiling, pressure drop, critical and oscillatory ﬂows. Letter grading.

231F. Advanced Heat Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 231A. Advanced topics in heat transfer from current literature. Linear and nonlinear theories of thermal and hydrodynamic instability; variational methods in transport phenomena; phenomenological theories of turbulent heat and mass transport. Letter grading.

231G. Microscopic Energy Transport. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 105D. Heat carriers (photons, electronics, phonons, molecules) and their energy characteristics, statistical properties of heat carriers, scattering and propagation of heat carriers, Boltzmann transport equations, derivation of classical laws from Boltzmann transport equations, deviation from classical laws at small scale. Letter grading.

232B. Advanced Mass Transfer. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 132A. Formulation of general convective heat and mass transfer problem, including equilibrium and nonequilibrium chemistry. Similar and nonsimilar solutions for laminar ﬂows; solution procedures for turbulent ﬂows. Multicomponent diffusion. Application to hypersonic boundary layer, ablation and transpiration cooling, combustion. Letter grading.

235A. Nuclear Reactor Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 135, 192A. Underlying physics and mathematics of nuclear reactor (ﬁssion) core design. Diffusion theory, reactor kinetics, slowing down and thermalization, multigroup methods, introduction to transport theory. Letter grading.

M237B. Fusion Plasma Physics and Analysis. (4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M287.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Electrical Engineering M185. Fundamentals of plasmas at thermonuclear burning conditions. Fokker/Planck equation and applications to heating by neutral beams, RF, and fusion reaction products. Bremsstrahlung, synchrotron, and atomic radiation processes. Plasma surface interactions. Fluid description of burning plasma. Dynamics, stability, and control. Applications in tokamaks, tandem mirrors, and alternate concepts. Letter grading. 426 / Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

237D. Fusion Engineering and Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Fusion reactions and fuel cycles. Principles of inertial and magnetic fusion. Plasma requirements for controlled fusion. Plasma-surface interactions. Fusion reactor concepts and technological components. Analysis and design of high heat ﬂux components, energy conversion and tritium breeding components, radiation shielding, magnets, and heating. Letter grading.

239B. Seminar: Current Topics in Transport Phenomena. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Lectures, discussions, student presentations, and projects in areas of current interest in transport phenomena. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

239D. Seminar: Current Topics in Nuclear Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Lectures, discussions, student presentations, and projects in areas of current interest in nuclear engineering. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

239F. Special Topics in Transport Phenomena. (2 to 4) Lecture, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Advanced and current study of one or more aspects of heat and mass transfer, such as turbulence, stability and transition, buoyancy effects, variational methods, and measurement techniques. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

239G. Special Topics in Nuclear Engineering. (2 to 4) Lecture, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Advanced study in areas of current interest in nuclear engineering, such as reactor safety, risk-beneﬁt trade-offs, nuclear materials, and reactor design. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

239H. Special Topics in Fusion Physics, Engineering, and Technology. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Advanced treatment of subjects selected from research areas in fusion science and engineering, such as instabilities in burning plasmas, alternate fusion conﬁnement concepts, inertial conﬁnement fusion, ﬁssion-fusion hybrid systems, and fusion reactor safety. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

CM240. Introduction to Biomechanics. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering CM240.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 102 (or Civil Engineering 108), 156A. Introduction to mechanical functions of human body; skeletal adaptations to optimize load transfer, mobility, and function. Dynamics and kinematics. Fluid mechanics applications. Heat and mass transfer. Power generation. Laboratory simulations and tests. Concurrently scheduled with course CM140. Letter grading.

250A. Foundations of Fluid Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 150A. Corequisite: course 182B. Development and application of fundamental principles of ﬂuid mechanics at graduate level, with emphasis on incompressible ﬂow. Flow kinematics, basic equations, constitutive relations, exact solutions on the Navier/ Stokes equations, vorticity dynamics, decomposition of ﬂow ﬁelds, potential ﬂow. Letter grading.

250B. Viscous and Turbulent Flows. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 150A. Fundamental principles of ﬂuid dynamics applied to study of ﬂuid resistance. States of ﬂuid motion discussed in order of advancing Reynolds number; wakes, boundary layers, instability, transition, and turbulent shear ﬂows. Letter grading.

250C. Compressible Flows. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B. Effects of compressibility in viscous and inviscid ﬂows. Steady and unsteady inviscid subsonic and supersonic ﬂows; method of characteristics; small disturbance theories (linearized and hypersonic); shock dynamics. Letter grading.

250D. Computational Aerodynamics. (4) Lecture, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B, 182C. Introduction to useful methods for computation of aerodynamic ﬂow ﬁelds. Coverage of potential, Euler, and Navier/Stokes equations for subsonic to hypersonic speeds. Letter grading.

250E. Spectral Methods in Fluid Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 182A, 182B, 182C, 250A, 250B. Introduction to basic concepts and techniques of various spectral methods applied to solving partial differential equations. Particular emphasis on techniques of solving unsteady three-dimensional Navier/Stokes equations. Topics include spectral representation of functions, discrete Fourier transform, etc. Letter grading.

250F. Hypersonic and High-Temperature Gas Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisite: course 250C. Molecular and chemical description of equilibrium and nonequilibrium hypersonic and high-temperature gas ﬂows, chemical thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics for calculation gas properties, equilibrium ﬂows of real gases, vibrational and chemical rate processes, nonequilibrium ﬂows of real gases, and computational ﬂuid dynamics methods for nonequilibrium hypersonic ﬂows. Letter grading.

252A. Stability of Fluid Motion. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 150A. Mechanisms by which laminar ﬂows can become unstable and lead to turbulence of secondary motions. Linear stability theory; thermal, centrifugal, and shear instabilities; boundary layer instability. Nonlinear aspects: sufﬁcient criteria for stability, subcritical instabilities, supercritical states, transition to turbulence. Letter grading.

252B. Turbulence. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 250A, 250B. Characteristics of turbulent ﬂows, conservation and transport equations, statistical description of turbulent ﬂows, scales of turbulent motion, simple turbulent ﬂows, free-shear ﬂows, wall-bounded ﬂows, turbulence modeling, numerical simulations of turbulent ﬂows, and turbulence control. Letter grading.

252C. Fluid Mechanics of Combustion Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B. Recommended: course 250C. Review of ﬂuid mechanics and chemical thermodynamics applied to reactive systems, laminar diffusion ﬂames, premixed laminar ﬂames, stability, ignition, turbulent combustion, supersonic combustion. Letter grading.

252D. Combustion Rate Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 252C. Basic concepts in chemical kinetics: molecular collisions, distribution functions and averaging, semiempirical and ab initio potential surfaces, trajectory calculations, statistical reaction rate theories. Practical examples of large-scale chain mechanisms from combustion chemistry of several elements, etc. Letter grading.

253A. Advanced Engineering Acoustics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Advanced studies in engineering acoustics, including three-dimensional wave propagation; propagation in bounded media; Ray acoustics; attenuation mechanisms in ﬂuids. Letter grading.

253B. Fundamentals of Aeroacoustics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 150A. Detailed discussion of plane waves, point sources. Nonlinearity, layered and moving media, multiple reﬂections. Inhomogeneous wave equation. Monopole, dipole, quadrupole source ﬁelds from scattering inhomogeneities and turbulence; Lighthill theory; moving sources. Similarity methods. Selected detailed applications. Letter grading.

254A. Special Topics in Aerodynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 150A, 150B, 182A, 182B, 182C. Special topics of current interest in advanced aerodynamics. Examples include transonic ﬂow, hypersonic ﬂow, sonic booms, and unsteady aerodynamics. Letter grading.

255A. Advanced Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 155, 169A. Variational principles and Lagrange equations. Kinematics and dynamics of rigid bodies; procession and nutation of spinning bodies. Letter grading.

255B. Mathematical Methods in Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 255A. Concepts of stability; state-space interpretation; stability determination by simulation, linearization, and Liapunov direct method; the Hamiltonian as a Liapunov function; nonautonomous systems; averaging and perturbation methods of nonlinear analysis; parametric excitation and nonlinear resonance. Application to mechanical systems. Letter grading.

M256A. Mechanics of Deformable Solids. (4) (Formerly numbered 256A.) (Same as Civil Engineering M230A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 156A or 166A. Development of fundamental principles and equations of solid mechanics. Cartesian tensors; kinematics of large and small deformations; balance laws of mass, momentum, and energy; constitutive relations of elasticity, thermoelasticity, and viscoelasticity for isotropic and anisotropic solids; solution of selected problems. Letter grading.

M256B. Elasticity. (4) (Same as Civil Engineering M230B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M256A. Solution of linear elastostatic problems using special techniques. Field equations of linear elastostatics; uniqueness of solution; Betti/Rayleigh reciprocity relation; solution of two-dimensional problems using stress functions; stress concentration at holes and inclusions; complex variables and transform methods in elasticity; stress singularity at cracks and corners; stresses and strains in composites; three-dimensional problems — Kelvin, Boussinesq, and Cerruti problems, boundary integral equation method. Letter grading.

M256C. Plasticity. (4) (Same as Civil Engineering M239.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M256A, M256B. Classical rate-independent plasticity theory, yield functions, ﬂow rules and thermodynamics. Classical rate-dependent viscoplasticity, Perzyna and Duvant/Lions types of viscoplasticity. Thermoplasticity and creep. Return mapping algorithms for plasticity and viscoplasticity. Finite element implementations. Letter grading.

256F. Analytical Fracture Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 156A, 156B, or 166A, and Materials Science 243A. Review of modern fracture mechanics, elementary stress analyses; analytical and numerical methods for calculation of crack tip stress intensity factors; engineering applications in stiffened structures, pressure vessels, plates, and shells. Letter grading.

M257A. Elastodynamics. (4) (Same as Earth and Space Sciences M224A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M256A, M256B. Equations of linear elasticity, Cauchy equation of motion, constitutive relations, boundary and initial conditions, principle of energy. Sources and waves in unbounded isotropic, anisotropic, and dissipative solids. Half-space problems. Guided waves in layered media. Applications to dynamic fracture, nondestructive evaluation (NDE), and mechanics of earthquakes. Letter grading.

259A. Seminar: Advanced Topics in Fluid Mechanics. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Advanced study of topics in ﬂuid mechanics, with intensive student participation involving assignments in research problems leading to term paper or oral presentation (possible help from guest lecturers). Letter grading. Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering / 427

259B. Seminar: Advanced Topics in Solid Mechanics. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Advanced study in various ﬁelds of solid mechanics on topics which may vary from term to term. Topics include dynamics, elasticity, plasticity, and stability of solids. Letter grading.

260. Current Topics in Mechanical Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Lectures, discussions, and student presentations and projects in areas of current interest in mechanical engineering. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

261A. Energy and Variational Principles in Structural Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 156A or 156B or 166A. Theory of linear elasticity. Calculus of variations. Principles of minimum potential energy and complementary energy. Stationary variational principles. Energy theorems. Matrix methods of structural analysis, with application to truss and frame problems. Variational principles as basis of ﬁnite element methods. Letter grading.

261B. Methods of Computational Mechanics I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 168, 261A. Weighted residual methods, weak forms, local trial and test functions, primal ﬁnite element method, multiﬁeld ﬁnite elements, high-performance elements and avoidance of locking, integral equation and ﬁeld boundary element methods, ﬁnite volume methods, meshless methods, term projects using digital computers. Applications to aerospace and mechanical engineering structural and solid mechanics, incompressible ﬂuid ﬂow, and heat transfer. Letter grading.

262. Mechanics of Intelligent Material Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 156B. Recommended: course 166C. Constitutive relations for electro-magneto-mechanical materials. Fiber-optic sensor technology. Micro/macro analysis, including classical lamination theory, shear lag theory, concentric cylinder analysis, hexagonal models, and homogenization techniques as they apply to active materials. Active systems design, inch-worm, and bimorph. Letter grading.

263A. Analytical Foundations of Motion Controllers. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisites: courses 163A, 294. Theory of motion control for modern computer-controlled machines; multiaxis computer-controlled machines; machine kinematics and dynamics; multiaxis motion coordination; coordinated motion with desired speed and acceleration; jerk analysis; motion command generation; theory and design of controller interpolators; motion trajectory design and analysis; geometry-speed-sampling time relationships. Letter grading.

263B. Spacecraft Dynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 255A. Recommended: course 255B. Modeling, dynamics, and stability of spacecraft; spinning and dualspin spacecraft dynamics; spinup through resonance, spinning rocket dynamics; environmental torques in space, modeling and model reduction of ﬂexible space structures. Letter grading.

263C. Mechanics and Trajectory Planning of Industrial Robots. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 163A. Theory and implementation of industrial robots. Design considerations. Kinematic structure modeling, trajectory planning, and system dynamics. Differential motion and static forces. Individual student study projects. Letter grading.

263D. Advanced Robotics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended preparation: courses 155, 163C, 171A, 263C. Motion planning and control of articulated dynamic systems: nonlinear joint control, experiments in joint control and multi-axes coordination, multibody dynamics, trajectory planning, motion optimization, dynamic performance and manipulator design, kinematic redundancies, motion planning of manipulators in space, obstacle avoidance. Letter grading.

M269A. Dynamics of Structures. (4) (Same as Civil Engineering M237A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 169A. Principles of dynamics. Determination of normal modes and frequencies by differential and integral equation solutions. Transient and steady state response. Emphasis on derivation and solution of governing equations using matrix formulation. Letter grading.

269B. Advanced Dynamics of Structures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M269A. Analysis of linear and nonlinear response of structures to dynamic loadings. Stresses and deﬂections in structures. Structural damping and self-induced vibrations. Letter grading.

269D. Aeroelastic Effects in Structures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M269A. Presentation of ﬁeld of aeroelasticity from uniﬁed viewpoint applicable to ﬂight structures, suspension bridges, buildings, and other structures. Derivation of aeroelastic operators and unsteady airloads from governing variational principles. Flow induced instability and response of structural systems. Letter grading.

M270A. Linear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280A and Electrical Engineering M240A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 171A or Electrical Engineering 141. State-space description of linear timeinvariant (LTI) and time-varying (LTV) systems in continuous and discrete time. Linear algebra concepts such as eigenvalues and eigenvectors, singular values, Cayley/Hamilton theorem, Jordan form; solution of state equations; stability, controllability, observability, realizability, and minimality. Stabilization design via state feedback and observers; separation principle. Connections with transfer function techniques. Letter grading.

270B. Linear Optimal Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M270A or Electrical Engineering M240A. Existence and uniqueness of solutions to linear quadratic (LQ) optimal control problems for continuous-time and discrete-time systems, ﬁnite-time and inﬁnite-time problems; Hamiltonian systems and optimal control; algebraic and differential Riccati equations; implications of controllability, stabilizability, observability, and detectability solutions. Letter grading.

M270C. Optimal Control. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280C and Electrical Engineering M240C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 270B. Applications of variational methods, Pontryagin maximum principle, Hamilton/Jacobi/Bellman equation (dynamic programming) to optimal control of dynamic systems modeled by nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Letter grading.

271A. Stochastic Processes in Dynamical Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 171A, 174. Probability space, random variables, stochastic processes, Brownian motion, Markov processes, stochastic integrals and differential equations, power spatial density, and Kolmogorov equations. Letter grading.

271B. Stochastic Estimation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 271A. Linear and nonlinear estimation theory, orthogonal projection lemma, Bayesian ﬁltering theory, conditional mean and risk estimators. Letter grading.

271C. Stochastic Optimal Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 271B. Stochastic dynamic programming, certainty equivalence principle, separation theorem, information statistics; linear-quadratic-Gaussian problem, linear-exponential-Gaussian problem. Relationship between stochastic control and robust control. Letter grading.

271D. Seminar: Special Topics in Dynamic Systems Control. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Seminar on current research topics in dynamic systems modeling, control, and applications. Topics selected from process control, differential games, nonlinear estimation, adaptive ﬁltering, industrial and aerospace applications, etc. Letter grading.

M272A. Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M282A and Electrical Engineering M242A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M270A or Chemical Engineering M280A or Electrical Engineering M240A. State-space techniques for studying solutions of timeinvariant and time-varying nonlinear dynamic systems with emphasis on stability. Liapunov theory (including converse theorems), invariance, center manifold theorem, input-to-state stability and small-gain theorem. Letter grading.

273A. Robust Control System Analysis and Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 171A, M270A. Graduatelevel introduction to analysis and design of multivariable control systems. Multivariable loop-shaping, performance requirements, model uncertainty representations, and robustness covered in detail from frequency domain perspective. Structured singular value and its application to controller synthesis. Letter grading.

275A. System Identiﬁcation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Methods for identiﬁcation of dynamical systems from input/output data, with emphasis on identiﬁcation of discrete-time (digital) models of sampled-data systems. Coverage of conversion to continuous-time models. Models identiﬁed include transfer functions and state-space models. Discussion of applications in mechanical and aerospace engineering, including identiﬁcation of ﬂexible structures, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices, and acoustic ducts. Letter grading.

M276. Dynamic Programming. (4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M237.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisite: Electrical Engineering 232A or 236A or 236B. Introduction to mathematical analysis of sequential decision processes. Finite horizon model in both deterministic and stochastic cases. Finite-state inﬁnite horizon model. Methods of solution. Examples from inventory theory, ﬁnance, optimal control and estimation, Markov decision processes, combinatorial optimization, communications. Letter grading.

M280. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Fabrication. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M250A and Electrical Engineering M250A.) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M180L. Advanced discussion of micromachining processes used to construct MEMS. Coverage of many lithographic, deposition, and etching processes, as well as their combination in process integration. Materials issues such as chemical resistance, corrosion, mechanical properties, and residual/intrinsic stress. Letter grading.

280L. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Laboratory. (4) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, six hours; outside study, ﬁve hours. Requisite: course 180. Hands-on micromachining. Mask layout, clean room procedure, lithography, oxidation, LPCVD coatings, evaporation, wet etchings (both isotropic and anisotropic), dry etchings, process monitoring. Students fabricate simple micromechanical devices by both surface and bulk micromachining and test and characterize them. Letter grading.

281. Microsciences. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 150A. Basic science issues in micro domain. Topics include micro ﬂuid science, microscale heat transfer, mechanical behavior of microstructures, as well as dynamics and control of micro devices. Letter grading.

M282. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Device Physics and Design. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M250B and Electrical Engineering M250B.) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M280. Introduction to MEMS design. Design methods, design rules, sensing and actuation mechanisms, microsensors, and microactuators. Designing MEMS to be produced with both foundry and nonfoundry processes. Computer-aided design for MEMS. Design project required. Letter grading. 428 / Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering

283. Experimental Mechanics for Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Methods, techniques, and philosophies being used to characterize microelectromechanical systems for engineering applications. Material characterization, mechanical/material properties, mechanical characterization. Topics include fundamentals of crystallography, anisotropic material properties, and mechanical behavior (e.g., strength/ fracture/fatigue) as they relate to microscale. Considerable emphasis on emerging experimental approaches to assess design-relevant mechanical properties. Letter grading.

284. Sensors, Actuators, and Signal Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Principles and performance of micro transducers. Applications of using unique properties of micro transducers for distributed and real-time control of engineering problems. Associated signal processing requirements for these applications. Letter grading.

285. Interfacial Phenomena. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 103, M105A, 105D, 182A. Introduction to fundamental physical phenomena occurring at interfaces and application of their knowledge to engineering problems. Fundamental concepts of interfacial phenomena, including surface tension, surfactants, interfacial thermodynamics, interfacial forces, interfacial hydrodynamics, and dynamics of triple line. Presentation of various applications, including wetting, change of phase (boiling and condensation), forms and emulsions, microelectromechanical systems, and biological systems. Letter grading.

286. Molecular Dynamics Simulation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: computer programming experience. Requisites: courses 182A, 182C. Introduction to basic concepts and methodologies of molecular dynamics simulation. Advantages and disadvantages of this approach for various situations. Emphasis on systems of engineering interest, especially microscale ﬂuid mechanics, heat transfer, and solid mechanics problems. Letter grading.

288. Laser Microfabrication. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Materials Science 14, Physics 17. Science and engineering of laser microscopic fabrication of advanced materials, including semiconductors, metals, and insulators. Topics include fundamentals in laser interactions with advanced materials, transport issues (therma, mass, chemical, carrier, etc.) in laser microfabrication, state-of-the-art optics and instrumentation for laser microfabrication, applications such as rapid prototyping, surface modiﬁcations (physical/chemical), micromachines for three-dimensional MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) and data storage, up-to-date research activities. Student term projects. Letter grading.

289. Nanoscale Fabrication, Characterization, and Biodetection. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours. Requisites: courses M180, M180L. Introduction to cutting-edge knowledge and laboratory techniques about nanoscale fabrication, characterization, and biodetection, including basic physical, chemical, and biological principles in nano-areas; top-down and bottom-up (self-assembly) nanofabrication; nanocharacterization (AEM, SEM, etc.); nanoscale electric devices, circuits, and optical and electrochemical biosensors. Training provided in multidisciplinary areas of nanotechnology; students encouraged to create their own ideas in self-designed experiments. Letter grading.

293. Quality Engineering in Design and Manufacturing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 174. Quality engineering concepts and approaches. Taguchi methods of robust technology development and off-line control. Quality loss function, signal-to-noise ratio, and orthogonal arrays. Parametric design of products and production processes. Tolerance design. Online quality control systems. Decision making in quality engineering. Letter grading.

294. Computational Geometry for Design and Manufacturing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 184. Computational geometry for design and manufacturing, with special emphasis on curve and surface theory, geometric modeling of curves and surfaces, B-splines and NURBS, composite curves and surfaces, computing methods for surface design and manufacture, and current research topics in computational geometry for CAD/CAM systems. Letter grading.

295A. Computer-Aided Manufacturing. (4) (Formerly numbered 295.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: course 163A or 185. Requisite: course 94. Concepts, methods, and elements of computer-aided manufacturing. Planning and control of manufacturing systems. Group technology and computer-aided process planning. Design and modeling of ﬂexible manufacturing systems. Computer-aided manufacturing. Letter grading.

295B. Internet-Based Collaborative Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 94, 184. Exploration of advanced state-of-the-art concepts in Internet-based collaborative design, including software environments to connect designers over Internet, networked variable media graphics environments such as high-end virtual reality systems, mid-range graphics, and low-end mobile device-based systems, and multifunctional design collaboration and software tools to support it. Letter grading.

295C. Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Systems: Analysis, Design, and Applications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate engineering students. Examination of emerging discipline of radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), including basics of RFID, how RFID systems function, design and analysis of RFID systems, and applications to ﬁelds such as supply chain, manufacturing, retail, and homeland security. Letter grading.

296A. Damage and Failure of Materials in Mechanical Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 156A, Materials Science 143A. Role of failure prevention in mechanical design and case studies. Mechanics and physics of material imperfections: voids, dislocations, cracks, and inclusions. Statistical and deterministic design methods. Plastic, fatigue, and creep damage. Letter grading.

296B. Thermochemical Processing of Materials. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131A, 183. Thermodynamics, heat and mass transfer, principles of material processing: phase equilibria and transitions, transport mechanisms of heat and mass, moving interfaces and heat sources, natural convection, nucleation and growth of microstructure, etc. Applications with chemical vapor deposition, inﬁltration, etc. Letter grading.

297. Composites Manufacturing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 166C, Materials Science 151. Matrix materials, ﬁbers, ﬁber preforms, elements of processing, autoclave/ compression molding, ﬁlament winding, pultrusion, resin transfer molding, automation, material removal and assembly, metal and ceramic matrix composites, quality assurance. Letter grading.

298. Seminar: Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Seminars may be organized in advanced technical ﬁelds. If appropriate, ﬁeld trips may be arranged. May be repeated with topic change. Letter grading.

M299A. Seminar: Systems, Dynamics, and Control Topics. (2) (Same as Chemical Engineering M297 and Electrical Engineering M248S.) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to graduate engineering students. Presentations of research topics by leading academic researchers from ﬁelds of systems, dynamics, and control. Students who work in these ﬁelds present their papers and results. S/U grading.

375. Teaching Apprentice Practicum. (1 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Preparation: apprentice personnel employment as teaching assistant, associate, or fellow. Teaching apprenticeship under active guidance and supervision of regular faculty member responsible for curriculum and instruction at the University. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

474B. Concurrent Engineering. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Materials Science 474A. Product design, CAD/CAM, engineering analysis integration, project management. Letter grading.

474C. Total Quality Engineering. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 474B. Total quality management, statistics, probability, off-line quality control, online quality control, quality inspection. Letter grading.

475B. Automation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Materials Science 475A. Automatic control of single devices and processes for manufacturing automation. Integrated automation design. Introduction to control, digital control, and rule-based systems. Sensors and actuators used in manufacturing processes. Robotics and multiaxis machine tools. Integration of computer-controlled systems and control hardware. Letter grading.

476. Integrated Manufacturing Engineering (IME) Seminar Series. (1) Lecture, one hour. Lectures by engineers in executive positions to provide management perspectives in manufacturing enterprises. Current manufacturing techniques and integrated product development efforts by industry experts. S/U grading.

478. Integrated Manufacturing Engineering (IME) Group Project Studies. (1 to 12) Lecture, one hour; group projects, one to 12 hours. Teams of students perform detailed analyses to address problems presented and implement manufacturing solutions within industrial settings. S/U grading.

497A-497B. Field Project in Manufacturing Engineering. (4-4) Lecture, two hours. Teams of students perform detailed system analysis and plan design of manufacturing engineering systems at various manufacturing plants. In Progress (497A) and S/U or letter (497B) grading.

596. Directed Individual or Tutorial Studies. (2 to

8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Petition forms to request enrollment may be obtained from assistant dean, Graduate Studies. Supervised investigation of advanced technical problems. S/U grading.

597A. Preparation for M.S. Comprehensive Examination. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Reading and preparation for M.S. comprehensive examination. S/U grading.

597B. Preparation for Ph.D. Preliminary Examinations. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. S/U grading.

597C. Preparation for Ph.D. Oral Qualifying Examination. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Preparation for oral qualifying examination, including preliminary research on dissertation. S/U grading.

598. Research for and Preparation of M.S. Thesis. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Supervised independent research for M.S. candidates, including thesis prospectus. S/U grading.

599. Research for and Preparation of Ph.D. Dissertation. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate mechanical and aerospace engineering students. Usually taken after students have been advanced to candidacy. S/U grading.