2. Great Ideas in Computer Science. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Broad coverage for liberal arts and social sciences students of computer science theory, technology, and implications, including artiﬁcial and neural machine intelligence, computability limits, virtual reality, cellular automata, artiﬁcial life, programming languages survey, and philosophical and societal implications. P/NP or letter grading.

31. Introduction to Computer Science I. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to Computer Science and Electrical Engineering majors. Introduction to computer science via theory, applications, and programming. Basic data types, operators and control structures. Input/output. Procedural and data abstraction. Introduction to object-oriented software development. Functions, recursion. Arrays, strings, pointers. Abstract data types, object-oriented programming. Examples and exercises from computer science theory and applications. Letter grading.

32. Introduction to Computer Science II. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 31. Limited to Computer Science and Electrical Engineering majors. Object-oriented software development. Abstract data type deﬁnition and use. Overloading, inheritance, polymorphism. Object-oriented view of data structures: stacks, queues, lists. Algorithm analysis. Trees, graphs, and associated algorithms. Searching and sorting. Case studies and exercises from computer science applications. Letter grading.

33. Introduction to Computer Organization. (5) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, nine hours. Enforced requisite: course 32. Limited to Computer Science and Electrical Engineering majors. Introductory course on computer architecture, assembly language, and operating systems fundamentals. Number systems, machine language, and assembly language. Procedure calls, stacks, interrupts, and traps. Assemblers, linkers, and loaders. Operating systems concepts: processes and process management, input/output (I/O) programming, memory management, ﬁle systems. Letter grading.

132. Compiler Construction. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 32, 131, 181. Compiler structure; lexical and syntactic analysis; semantic analysis and code generation; theory of parsing. Letter grading.

133. Parallel and Distributed Computing. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 111 (may be taken concurrently), 131. Distributed memory and shared memory parallel architectures; asynchronous parallel languages: MPI, Maisie; primitives for parallel computation: speciﬁcation of parallelism, interprocess communication and synchronization; design of parallel programs for scientiﬁc computation and distributed systems. Letter grading.

143. Database Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 32. Information systems and database systems in enterprises. File organization and secondary storage structures. Relational model and relational database systems. Network, hierarchical, and other models. Query languages. Database design principles. Transactions, concurrency, and recovery. Integrity and authorization. Letter grading.

M151B. Computer Systems Architecture. (4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M116C.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 33, and M51A or Electrical Engineering M16. Recommended: courses 111, and M152A or Electrical Engineering M116L. Computer system organization and design, implementation of CPU datapath and control, instruction set design, memory hierarchy (caches, main memory, virtual memory) organization and management, input/output subsystems (bus structures, interrupts, DMA), performance evaluation, pipelined processors. Letter grading.

151C. Design of Digital Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours. Requisites: courses M51A, M151B, M152A. Design of complex digital systems using hierarchal approaches and regular structures. Combinational, sequential, and algorithmic systems. Microprogramming and ﬁrmware engineering. Cost/performance measures and technology constraints. Use of design tools. Design project. Letter grading.

M152A. Introductory Digital Design Laboratory. (2) (Same as Electrical Engineering M116L.) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisite: course M51A or Electrical Engineering M16. Hands-on design, implementation, and debugging of digital logic circuits, use of computer-aided design tools for schematic capture and simulation, implementation of complex circuits using programmed array logic, design projects. Letter grading.

M152B. Digital Design Project Laboratory. (4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M116D.) Laboratory, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course M151B or Electrical Engineering M116C. Design and implementation of complex digital subsystems using ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (e.g., processors, special-purpose processors, device controllers, and input/output interfaces). Students work in teams to develop and implement designs and to document and give oral presentations of their work. Letter grading. Computer Science / 241

161. Fundamentals of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 32. Introduction to fundamental problem solving and knowledge representation paradigms of artiﬁcial intelligence. Introduction to Lisp with regular programming assignments. State-space and problem reduction methods, bruteforce and heuristic search, planning techniques, twoplayer games. Knowledge structures including predicate logic, production systems, semantic nets and primitives, frames, scripts. Special topics in natural language processing, expert systems, vision, and parallel architectures. Letter grading.

163. Introduction to Natural Language Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, two hours. Requisite: course 130 or 131. Role of syntax, semantics, and pragmatics in human language processing by computers. Natural language generators and parsers, inference, and conceptual analysis. Modeling conceptual processes and representing semantic knowledge by means of computer problems. Letter grading.

170A. Mathematical Modeling and Methods for Computer Science. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: Mathematics 33B. Introduction to methods for modeling and simulation using interactive computing environments. Extensive coverage of methods for numeric and symbolic computation, matrix algebra, statistics, ﬂoating point, optimization, and spectral analysis. Emphasis on applications in simulation of physical systems. Letter grading.

M171L. Data Communication Systems Laboratory. (2 to 4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M171L.) Laboratory, four to eight hours; outside study, two to four hours. Recommended preparation: courses M152A, 171. Limited to seniors. Interpretation of analog-signaling aspects of digital systems and data communications through experience in using contemporary test instruments to generate and display signals in relevant laboratory setups. Use of oscilloscopes, pulse and function generators, baseband spectrum analyzers, desktop computers, terminals, modems, PCs, and workstations in experiments on pulse transmission impairments, waveforms and their spectra, modem and terminal characteristics, and interfaces. Letter grading.

174A. Introduction to Computer Graphics. (4) (Formerly numbered 174.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours. Requisite: course 32. Basic principles behind modern two- and three-dimensional computer graphics systems, including complete set of steps that modern graphics pipelines use to create realistic images in real time. How to position and manipulate objects in scene using geometric and camera transformations. How to create ﬁnal image using perspective and orthographic transformations. Basics of modeling primitives such as polygonal models and implicit and parametric surfaces. Basic ideas behind color spaces, illumination models, shading, and texture mapping. Letter grading.

174B. Introduction to Computer Graphics: Three-Dimensional Photography and Rendering. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours. Requisite: course 174A. State of art in three-dimensional photography and image-based rendering. How to use cameras and light to capture shape and appearance of real objects and scenes. Process provides simple way to acquire three-dimensional models of unparalleled detail and realism. Applications of techniques from entertainment (reverse engineering and postprocessing of movies, generation of realistic synthetic objects and characters) to medicine (modeling of biological structures from imaging data), mixed reality (augmentation of video), and security (visual surveillance). Fundamental analytical tools for modeling and inferring geometric (shape) and photometric (reﬂectance, illumination) properties of objects and scenes, and for rendering and manipulating novel views. Letter grading.

C174C. Computer Animation. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours. Requisite: course 174A. Designed for juniors/seniors. Introduction to computer animation, including basic principles of character modeling, forward and inverse kinematics, forward and inverse dynamics, motion capture animation techniques, physics-based animation of particles and systems, and motor control. Concurrently scheduled with course C274C. Letter grading.

180. Introduction to Algorithms and Complexity.

(4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: course 32, and Mathematics 61 or 113. Designed for junior/senior Computer Science majors. Introduction to design and analysis of algorithms. Design techniques: divide-and-conquer, greedy method, dynamic programming; selection of prototypical algorithms; choice of data structures and representations; complexity measures: time, space, upper, lower bounds, asymptotic complexity; NP-completeness. Letter grading.

181. Introduction to Formal Languages and Automata Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: course 32, and Mathematics 61 or 113. Designed for junior/senior Computer Science majors. Grammars, automata, and languages. Finite-state languages and ﬁnite-state automata. Context-free languages and pushdown story automata. Unrestricted rewriting systems, recursively enumerable and recursive languages, and Turing machines. Closure properties, pumping lemmas, and decision algorithms. Introduction to computability. Letter grading.

M186A. Introduction to Cybernetics, Biomodeling, and Biomedical Computing. (2) (Formerly numbered M196A.) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M186A and Cybernetics M186A.) Lecture, two hours. Requisites: Mathematics 31A, 31B, Program in Computing 10A. Strongly recommended for students with potential interest in biomedical engineering/biocomputing ﬁelds or in Cybernetics as a major. Introduction and survey of topics in cybernetics, biomodeling, biocomputing, and related bioengineering disciplines. Lectures presented by faculty currently performing research in one of the areas; some sessions include laboratory tours. P/NP grading.

M186B. Computational Systems Biology: Modeling and Simulation of Biological Systems. (5) (Formerly numbered M196B.) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M186B, Cybernetics M186B, and Medicine M186B.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, two hours. Requisite: Electrical Engineering 102 or Mathematics 115A. Introduction to dynamic system modeling, compartmental modeling, and computer simulation methods for studying biomedical systems. Basics of numerical simulation algorithms, translating biomodeling goals and data into mathematic models and implementing them for simulation and analysis. Modeling software exploited for class assignments in PC laboratory. Letter grading. CM186L. Biomedical Systems/Biocybernetics Research Laboratory. (2 to 4) (Formerly numbered CM196L.) (Same as Biomedical Engineering CM186L and Cybernetics M186L.) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours. Requisite: course M186B. Special laboratory techniques and experience in biocybernetics research. Laboratory instruments, their use, design, and/or modiﬁcation for research in life sciences. Special research hardware, ﬁrmware, software. Use of simulation in experimental laboratory. Laboratory automation and safety. Comprehensive experiment design. Radioactive isotopes and kinetic studies. Experimental animals, controls. Concurrently scheduled with course CM286L. Letter grading.

188. Special Courses in Computer Science. (4) (Formerly numbered 198.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in computer science for undergraduate students that are taught on experimental or temporary basis, such as courses taught by resident and visiting faculty members. May be repeated once for credit with topic or instructor change. Letter grading.

194. Research Group Seminars: Computer Science. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for undergraduate students who are part of research group. Discussion of research methods and current literature in ﬁeld or of research of faculty members or students. Letter grading.

199. Directed Research in Computer Science. (2 to 8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to juniors/seniors. Supervised individual research or investigation under guidance of faculty mentor. Culminating paper or project required. May be repeated for credit with school approval. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Ofﬁce of Academic and Student Affairs. Letter grading.

Graduate Courses

201. Computer Science Seminar. (2) Seminar, four hours; outside study, two hours. Designed for graduate computer science students. Seminars on current research topics in computer science. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

202. Advanced Computer Science Seminar. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: completion of major ﬁeld examination in computer science. Current computer science research into theory of, analysis and synthesis of, and applications of information processing systems. Each member completes one tutorial and one or more original pieces of work in the specialized area. May be repeated for credit. Letter grading.

211. Network Protocol and Systems Software Design for Wireless and Mobile Internet. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 118. Designed for graduate students. In-depth study of network protocol and systems software design in area of wireless and mobile Internet. Topics include (1) networking fundamentals: design philosophy of TCP/IP, end-to-end arguments, and protocol design principles, (2) networking protocols: 802.11 MAC standard, packet scheduling, mobile IP, ad hoc routing, and wireless TCP, (3) mobile computing systems software: middleware, ﬁle system, services, and applications, and (4) topical studies: energy-efﬁcient design, security, location management, and quality of service. Letter grading.

212A. Queueing Systems Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 112, Electrical Engineering 131A. Resource sharing issues and theory of queueing (waiting-line) systems. Review of Markov chains and baby queueing theory. Method of stages. M/E r /1. E r /M/1. Bulk arrival and bulk service systems. Series-parallel stages. Fundamentals of open and closed queueing networks. Intermediate queueing theory: M/G/1; G/M/m. Collective marks. Advanced queueing theory: G/G/1; Lindley integral equation; spectral solution. Inequalities, bounds, approximations. Letter grading.

212B. Queueing Applications: Scheduling Algorithms and Queueing Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 212A. Priority queueing. Applications to time-sharing scheduling algorithms: FB, Round Robin, Conservation Law, Bounds. Queueing networks: deﬁnitions; job ﬂow balance; product form solutions — local balance, M→M; computational algorithms for performance measures; asymptotic behavior and bounds; approximation techniques — diffusion — iterative techniques; applications. Letter grading.

213. Distributed Embedded Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 111, 118. Designed for graduate students. Important class of distributed networks are those that support monitoring and manipulation of physical spaces through wireless sensor networks. Study of distributed protocols needed to realize these systems. Topics include design implications of energy and otherwise resource-constrained nodes, network self-conﬁguration and adaptation, localization and time synchronization, programming paradigm, applications, and usage issues such as human interfaces, safety, and security. Letter grading. 242 / Computer Science

214. Data Transmission in Computer Communications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 112. Limited to graduate computer science students. Discrete data streams, formats, rates, transductions; digital data transmissions via analog signaling in computer communication; media characteristics, systems methodologies, performance analysis; modem designs; physical interfaces in computer communication links; national/international standards; tests and measurements. Letter grading.

215. Computer Communications and Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 112. Resource sharing; computer trafﬁc characterizations; multiplexing; network structure; packet switching and other switching techniques; ARPANET and other computer network examples; network delay and analysis; network design and optimization; network protocols; routing and ﬂow control; satellite and ground radio packet switching; local networks; commercial network services and architectures. Optional topics include extended error control techniques; modems; SDLC, HDLC, X.25, etc.; protocol veriﬁcation; network simulation and measurement; integrated networks; communication processors. Letter grading.

216. Distributed Multiaccess Control in Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 212A, 215. Topics from the ﬁeld of distributed control and access in computer networks, including terrestrial distributed computer networks; satellite packet switching; ground radio packet switching; local network architecture and control. Letter grading.

217. Advanced Topics in Internet Research. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate students. Overview of Internet development history and fundamental principles underlying TCP/IP protocol design. Discussion of current research topics, including multicast routing protocols, multicast transport protocols (e.g., real-time, transport protocol, RTP, and SRM), support for integrated services, World Wide Web, multimedia applications on Internet. Fundamental issues in network protocol design and implementations. Letter grading.

218. Advanced Computer Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 112, 118. Review of seven-layer ISO-OSI model. High-speed networks: LANs, MANs, ATM. Flow and congestion control; bandwidth allocation. Internetting. Letter grading.

219. Current Topics in Computer System Modeling Analysis. (2 to 12) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of computer system modeling analysis in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor. Letter grading.

M222. Control and Coordination in Economics. (4) (Same as Economics M222A.) Lecture, three hours. Recommended preparation: appropriate mathematics course. Designed for graduate economics and engineering students. Stabilization policies, short- and long-run dynamics and stability analysis; decentralization, coordination in teams; certainty equivalence and separation theorems; stochastic and learning models. Bayesian approach to price and output rate adjustment. S/U or letter grading.

230A. Models of Information and Computation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 131, 181. Paradigms, models, frameworks, and problem solving; UML and metamodeling; basic information and computation models; axiomatic systems; domain theory; least ﬁxed point theory; well-founded induction. Logical models: sentences, axioms and rules, normal forms, derivation and proof, models and semantics, propositional logic, ﬁrst-order logic, logic programming. Functional models: expressions, equations, evaluation; combinators; lambda calculus; functional programming. Program models: program derivation and veriﬁcation using Hoare logic, object models, standard templates, design patterns, frameworks. Letter grading.

233A. Parallel Programming. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 111, 131. Mutual exclusion and resource allocation in distributed systems; primitives for parallel computation: speciﬁcation of parallelism, interprocess communication and synchronization, atomic actions, binary and multiway rendezvous; synchronous and asynchronous languages: CSP, Ada, Linda, Maisie, UC, and others; introduction to parallel program veriﬁcation. Letter grading.

233B. Veriﬁcation of Concurrent Programs. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 233A. Formal techniques for veriﬁcation of concurrent programs. Topics include safety, liveness, program and state assertion-based techniques, weakest precondition semantics, Hoare logic, temporal logic, UNITY, and axiomatic semantics for selected parallel languages. Letter grading.

239. Current Topics in Computer Science: Programming Languages and Systems. (2 to 12) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of computer science programming languages and systems in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

240A. Databases and Knowledge Bases. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 143. Theoretical and technological foundation of Intelligent Database Systems, which merge database technology, knowledge-based systems, and advanced programming environments. Rule-based knowledge representation, spatio-temporal reasoning, and logic-based declarative querying/programming are salient features of this technology. Other topics include object-relational systems and data mining techniques. Letter grading.

240B. Advanced Data and Knowledge Bases. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 143, 240A. Logical models for data and knowledge representations. Rule-based languages and nonmonotonic reasoning. Temporal queries, spatial queries, and uncertainty in deductive databases and object relational databases (ORDBs). Abstract data types and user-deﬁned column functions in ORDBs. Data mining algorithms. Semistructured information. Letter grading.

241A. Object-Oriented and Semantic Database Systems. (4) Lecture, three and one-half hours; discussion, 30 minutes; laboratory, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 143. Object database principles and requirements. Data models, accessing, and query languages. Object data management standards. Extended relational-object systems. Database systems architecture and functional components. Systems comparison. Commercial products. Database design, organization, indexing, and performance. Future directions. Other topics at discretion of instructor. Letter grading.

241B. Pictorial and Multimedia Database Systems. (4) Lecture, three and one-half hours; discussion, 30 minutes; laboratory, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 143, 241A. Multimedia data: alphanumeric, long text, images/pictures, video, and voice. Multimedia information systems requirements. Data models and accessing. Querying, visual languages, and communication. Database design and organization, logical and physical. Search by content and indexing methods. Internet multimedia streaming. Data heterogeneity and distribution. Other topics at discretion of instructor. Letter grading.

244A. Distributed Database Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 215 and/or 241A. File allocation, intelligent directory design, transaction management, deadlock, strong and weak concurrency control, commit protocols, semantic query answering, multidatabase systems, fault recovery techniques, network partitioning, examples, trade-offs, and design experiences. Letter grading.

245A. Intelligent Information Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 241A, 255A. Knowledge discovery in database, knowledge-base maintenance, knowledge-base and database integration architectures, and scale-up issues and applications to cooperative database systems, intelligent decision support systems, and intelligent planning and scheduling systems; computer architecture for processing large-scale knowledge-base/database systems. Letter grading.

246. Web Information Management. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 112, 143, 180, 181. Designed for graduate students. Scale of Web data requires novel algorithms and principles for their management and retrieval. Study of Web characteristics and new management techniques needed to build computer systems suitable for Web environment. Topics include Web measuring techniques, large-scale data mining algorithms, efﬁcient page refresh techniques, Web-search ranking algorithms, and query processing techniques on independent data sources. Letter grading.

249. Current Topics in Data Structures. (2 to 12) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of data structures in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor. Letter grading.

251A. Advanced Computer Architecture. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M151B. Recommended: course 111. Design and implementation of high-performance systems, advanced memory hierarchy techniques, static and dynamic pipelining, superscalar and VLIW processors, branch prediction, speculative execution, software support for instruction-level parallelism, simulation-based performance analysis and evaluation, state-of-the-art design examples, introduction to parallel architectures. Letter grading.

251B. Parallel Computer Architectures. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M151B. Recommended: course 251A. SIMD and MIMD systems, symmetric multiprocessors, distributed-shared-memory systems, messages-passing systems, clusters, interconnection networks, userlevel host-network interfaces, switching element design, communication primitives, cache coherency, memory consistency models, synchronization primitives, state-of-the-art design examples. Letter grading. Computer Science / 243

252A. Arithmetic Algorithms and Processors. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 251A. Number systems: conventional, redundant, signed-digit, and residue. Types of algorithms and implementations. Complexity measures. Fast algorithms and implementations for two-operand addition, multioperand addition, multiplication, division, and square root. On-line arithmetic. Evaluation of transcendental functions. Floating-point arithmetic and numerical error control. Arithmetic error codes. Residue arithmetic. Examples of contemporary arithmetic ICs and processors. Letter grading.

253A. Design of Fault-Tolerant Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite or corequisite: course 251A. Fundamental concepts of dependable computing. Design methodology for fault-tolerant systems. Analytic models and measures, modeling tools. Design for critical applications: long-life, real-time, and high-availability systems. Tolerance of design faults: design diversity and fault-tolerant software. Letter grading.

253C. Testing and Testable Design of VLSI Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M51A. Detailed study of various problems in testing and testable designs of VLSI systems, including fault modeling, fault simulation, testing for single stuck faults and multiple stuck faults, functional testing, design for testability, compression techniques, and built-in self-test. Letter grading.

254A. Computer Memories and Memory Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 251A. Generic types of memory systems; control, access modes, hierarchies, and allocation algorithms. Characteristics, system organization, and device considerations of ferrite memories, thin ﬁlm memories, and semiconductor memories. Letter grading.

255A. Distributed Processing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 215 and/or 251A. Task partitioning and allocation, interprocess communications, task response time model, process scheduling, message passing protocols, replicated ﬁle systems, interface, cache memory, actor model, ﬁne grain multicomputers, distributed operating system kernel, error recovery strategy, performance monitoring and measurement, scalability and maintainability, prototypes and commercial distributed systems. Letter grading.

256A. Advanced Scalable Architectures: Systems, Building Blocks, and Technology. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 251A. State-of-the-art scalable multiprocessors and multicomputers. High-performance VLSI building blocks. Capabilities and limitations of VLSI technology. Interdependency among implementation technology, packaging, chip microarchitecture, and system architecture. Mechanisms for exploiting parallelism. Current research areas. Examples of chips and systems. Letter grading.

M258A. Design of VLSI Circuits and Systems. (4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M216A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, three hours. Requisites: course M51A or Electrical Engineering M16, and Electrical Engineering 115A. Recommended: Electrical Engineering 115C. LSI/VLSI design and application in computer systems. Fundamental design techniques that can be used to implement complex integrated systems on a chip. Letter grading.

M258B-M258C. LSI in Computer System Design. (4-4) (Same as Electrical Engineering M216BM216C.) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours. Requisite: course M258A. LSI/VLSI design and application in computer systems. In-depth studies of VLSI architectures and VLSI design tools. In Progress (M258B) and S/U or letter (M258C) grading.

258E. Foundations of VLSI CAD Algorithms. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: one course in analysis and design of algorithms. Basic theory of combinatorial optimization for VLSI physical layout, including mathematical programming, network ﬂows, matching, greedy and heuristic algorithms, and stochastic methods. Emphasis on practical application to computer-aided physical design of VLSI circuits at high-level phases of layout: partitioning, placement, graph folding, ﬂoorplanning, and global routing. Letter grading.

258F. Physical Design Automation of VLSI Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Detailed study of various physical design automation problems of VLSI circuits, including logic partitioning, ﬂoorplanning, placement, global routing, channel and switchbox routing, planar routing and via minimization, compaction and performance-driven layout. Discussion of applications of a number of important optimization techniques, such as network ﬂows, Steiner trees, simulated annealing, and generic algorithms. Letter grading.

258G. Logic Synthesis of Digital Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M51A, 180. Detailed study of various problems in logic-level synthesis of VLSI digital systems, including two-level Boolean network optimization; multilevel Boolean network optimization; technology mapping for standard cell designs and ﬁeld-programmable gate-array (FPGA) designs; retiming for sequential circuits; and applications of binary decision diagrams (BDDS). Letter grading.

258H. Analysis and Design of High-Speed VLSI Interconnects. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M258A, 258F. Detailed study of various problems in analysis and design of high-speed VLSI interconnects at both integrated circuit (IC) and packing levels, including interconnect capacitance and resistance, lossless and lossy transmission lines, cross-talk and power distribution noise, delay models and power dissipation models, interconnect topology and geometry optimization, and clocking for high-speed systems. Letter grading.

259. Current Topics in Computer Science: System Design/Architecture. (2 to 12) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of computer science system design in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

261A. Problem Solving and Search. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 180. In-depth treatment of systematic problem-solving search algorithms in artiﬁcial intelligence, including problem spaces, brute-force search, heuristic search, linear-space algorithms, real-time search, heuristic evaluation functions, two-player games, and constraint-satisfaction problems. Letter grading.

262A. Reasoning with Partial Beliefs. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 112 or Electrical Engineering 131A. Review of several formalisms for representing and managing uncertainty in reasoning systems; presentation of comprehensive description of Bayesian inference using belief networks representation. Letter grading.

262B. Knowledge-Based Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 262A. Machine representation of judgmental knowledge and uncertain relationships. Inference on inexact knowledge bases. Rule-based systems — principles, advantages, and limitations. Signal understanding. Automated planning systems. Knowledge acquisition and explanation producing techniques. Letter grading.

M262C. Causal Inference. (4) (Same as Statistics M241.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 112 or equivalent probability theory course. Techniques of using computers to interpret, summarize, and form theories of empirical observations. Mathematical analysis of trade-offs between computational complexity, storage requirements, and precision of computerized models. Letter grading.

262Z. Current Topics in Cognitive Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 262A. Additional requisites for each offering announced in advance by department. Theory and implementation of systems which emulate or support human reasoning. Current literature and individual studies in artiﬁcial intelligence, knowledgebased systems, decision support systems, computational psychology, and heuristic programming theory. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

263A. Language and Thought. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 130 or 131 or 161. Introduction to natural language processing (NLP), with emphasis on semantics. Presentation of process models for variety of tasks, including question answering, paraphrasing, machine translation, word-sense disambiguation, narrative and editorial comprehension. Examination of both symbolic and statistical approaches to language processing and acquisition. Letter grading.

263B. Connectionist Natural Language Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 161 or 163 or 263A. Examination of connectionist/ANN architectures designed for natural language processing. Issues include localist vs. distributed representations, variable binding, instantiation and inference via spreading activation, acquisition of language and world knowledge (for instance, via back propagation in PDP networks and competitive learning in self-organizing feature maps), and grounding of symbols in sensory/motor experience. Letter grading.

263C. Animats-Based Modeling. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 130 or 131 or 161. Animats are mobile/sensing animal-like software agents embedded in simulated dynamic environments. Emphasis on modeling: goaloriented behavior via neurocontrollers, adaptation via reinforcement learning, evolutionary programming. Animat-based tasks include foraging, mate ﬁnding, predation, navigation, predator avoidance, cooperative nest construction, communication, and parenting. Letter grading.

264A. Automated Reasoning: Theory and Applications. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisite: course 161. Introduction to theory and practice of automated reasoning using propositional and ﬁrst-order logic. Topics include syntax and semantics of formal logic; algorithms for logical reasoning, including satisﬁability and entailment; syntactic and semantic restrictions on knowledge bases; effect of these restrictions on expressiveness, compactness, and computational tractability; applications of automated reasoning to diagnosis, planning, design, formal veriﬁcation, and reliability analysis. Letter grading.

265A. Machine Learning. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 263A, 264A. Introduction to machine learning. Learning by analogy, inductive learning, modeling creativity, learning by experience, role of episodic memory organization in learning. Examination of BACON, AM, Eurisko, HACKER, teachable production systems. Failuredriven learning. Letter grading. 244 / Computer Science

267A. Neural Models. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate students. Review of major neurophysiological milestones in understanding brain architecture and processes. Focus on brain theories that are important for modern computer science and, in particular, on models of sensory perception, sensory-motor coordination, and cerebellar and cerebral structure and function. Students required to prepare a paper analyzing research in one area of interest. Letter grading.

267B. Artiﬁcial Neural Systems and Connectionist Computing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate students. Analysis of major connectionist computing paradigms and underlying models of biological and physical processes. Examination of past and current implementations of artiﬁcial neural networks along with their applications to associative knowledge processing, general multisensor pattern recognition including speed and vision, and adaptive robot control. Students required to prepare a paper analyzing research in one area of interest. Letter grading.

268. Machine Perception. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate students. Computational aspects of processing visual and other sensory information. Uniﬁed treatment of early vision in man and machine. Integration of symbolic and iconic representations in process of image segmentation. Computing multimodal sensory information by “neural-net” architectures. Letter grading.

268S. Seminar: Computational Neuroscience. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Designed for students undertaking thesis research. Discussion of advanced topics and current research in computational neuroscience. Neural networks and connectionism as a paradigm for parallel and concurrent computation in application to problems of perception, vision, multimodal sensory integration, and robotics. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

269. Seminar: Current Topics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. (2 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Review of current literature and research practicum in an area of artiﬁcial intelligence in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

270A. Computer Methodology: Advanced Numerical Methods. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Electrical Engineering 103 or Mathematics 151B or comparable experience with numerical computing. Designed for graduate computer science and engineering students. Principles of computer treatment of selected numerical problems in algebraic and differential systems, transforms and spectra, data acquisition and reduction; emphasis on concepts pertinent to modeling and simulation and the applicability of contemporary developments in numerical software. Computer exercises. Letter grading.

271A. Modeling and Simulation of Lumped Parameter Systems. (4) Lecture, eight hours. Recommended preparation: course 270A. Characterization of electrical, electromechanical, and other engineering problems by systems of nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Survey of integration algorithms. Digital simulation languages for continuous systems. Real-time simulation using array processor and multiprocessor computer systems. Letter grading.

271B. Modeling and Simulation of Distributed Parameter Systems. (4) Lecture, eight hours. Recommended preparation: course 270A. Mathematical formulation of engineering ﬁeld problems governed by partial differential equations. Finite difference and ﬁnite element approximations. Principal algorithms for solving elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic partial differential equations. Supercomputers, vector processors, multiprocessors, and array processors. Letter grading.

271C. Seminar: Advanced Simulation Methods. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 271A. Discussion of advanced topics in simulation of systems characterized by ordinary and partial differential equations. Topics include (among others) simulation languages, dataﬂow machines, array processors, and advanced mathematical modeling techniques. Topics vary each term. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

272. Advanced Discrete Event Simulation and Modeling Techniques. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. In-depth study in discrete event simulation and modeling techniques, including building valid and credible simulation models, output analysis of systems, comparisons of alternative system conﬁgurations. Variance reduction techniques, simulation models of computer systems and manufacturing systems. Letter grading.

273A. Digital Processing of Engineering and Statistical Data. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Computer methods for processing engineering and statistical data. Algorithms to evaluate recursive ﬁlter functions, Fourier series, power spectral, analysis correlation computations, and statistical testing. Letter grading.

C274C. Computer Animation. (4) Lecture, four hours; recitation, two hours. Requisite: course 174A. Introduction to computer animation, including basic principles of character modeling, forward and inverse kinematics, forward and inverse dynamics, motion capture animation techniques, physics-based animation of particles and systems, and motor control. Concurrently scheduled with course C174C. Letter grading.

M276A. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. (4) (Formerly numbered 276A.) (Same as Statistics M231.) Lecture, three hours. Designed for graduate students. Fundamental concepts, theories, and algorithms for pattern recognition and machine learning that are used in computer vision, image processing, speech recognition, data mining, statistics, and computational biology. Topics include Bayesian decision theory, parametric and nonparametric learning, clustering, complexity (VC-dimension, MDL, AIC), PCA/ICA/TCA, MDS, SVM, boosting. S/U or letter grading.

276B. Structured Computer Vision. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate students. Methods for computer processing of image data. Systems, concepts, and algorithms for image analysis, radiologic and robotic applications. Letter grading.

276C. Speech and Language Communication in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M276A or 276B. Topics in human-computer communication: interaction with pictorial information systems, sound and symbol generation by humans and machines, semantics of data, systems for speech recognition and understanding. Use of speech and text for computer input and output in applications. Letter grading.

279. Current Topics in Computer Science: Methodology. (2 to 12) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of computer science methodology in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

280A-280ZZ. Algorithms. (4 each) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 180. Additional requisites for each offering announced in advance by department. Selections from design, analysis, optimization, and implementation of algorithms; computational complexity and general theory of algorithms; algorithms for particular application areas. Subtitles of some current sections: Principles of Design and Analysis (280A); Distributed Algorithms (280D); Graphs and Networks (280G). May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor and with topic change. Letter grading.

281A. Computability and Complexity. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 181 or compatible background. Concepts fundamental to study of discrete information systems and theory of computing, with emphasis on regular sets of strings, Turing-recognizable (recursively enumerable) sets, closure properties, machine characterizations, nondeterminisms, decidability, unsolvable problems, “easy” and “hard” problems, PTIME/NPTIME. Letter grading.

281D. Discrete State Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisite: course 181. Finite-state machines, transducers, and their generalizations; regular expressions, transduction expressions, realizability; decomposition, synthesis, and design considerations; topics in state and system identiﬁcation and fault diagnosis, linear machines, probabilistic machines, applications in coding, communication, computing, system modeling, and simulation. Letter grading.

M282A. Cryptography. (4) (Formerly numbered 282A.) (Same as Mathematics M209A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Introduction to theory of cryptography, stressing rigorous deﬁnitions and proofs of security. Topics include notions of hardness, one-way functions, hard-core bits, pseudorandom generators, pseudorandom functions and pseudorandom permutations, semantic security, public-key and private-key encryption, secret-sharing, message authentication, digital signatures, interactive proofs, zero-knowledge proofs, collision-resistant hash functions, commitment protocols, key-agreement, contract signing, and two-party secure computation with static security. Letter grading.

M282B. Cryptographic Protocols. (4) (Formerly numbered 282B.) (Same as Mathematics M209B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M282A. Consideration of advanced cryptographic protocol design and analysis. Topics include noninteractive zero-knowledge proofs; zero-knowledge arguments; concurrent and non-black-box zeroknowledge; IP=PSPACE proof, stronger notions of security for public-key encryption, including chosenciphertext security; secure multiparty computation; dealing with dynamic adversary; nonmalleability and composability of secure protocols; software protection; threshold cryptography; identity-based cryptography; private information retrieval; protection against man-in-middle attacks; voting protocols; identiﬁcation protocols; digital cash schemes; lower bounds on use of cryptographic primitives, software obfuscation. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

M283A-M283B. Topics in Applied Number Theory. (4-4) (Same as Mathematics M208A-M208B.) Lecture, three hours. Basic number theory, including congruences and prime numbers. Cryptography: public-key and discrete log cryptosystems. Attacks on cryptosystems. Primality testing and factorization methods. Elliptic curve methods. Topics from coding theory: Hamming codes, cyclic codes, Gilbert/Varshamov bounds, Shannon theorem. S/U or letter grading.

284A-284ZZ. Topics in Automata and Languages. (4 each) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 181. Additional requisites for each offering announced in advance by department. Selections from families of formal languages, grammars, machines, operators; pushdown automata, context-free languages and their generalizations, parsing; multidimensional grammars, developmental systems; machine-based complexity. Subtitles of some current and planned sections: Context-Free Languages (284A), Parsing Algorithms (284P). May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor and with topic change. Letter grading. Conservation of Archaeological and Ethnographic Materials / 245

CM286L. Biomedical Systems/Biocybernetics Research Laboratory. (2 to 4) (Formerly numbered CM296L.) (Same as Biomedical Engineering CM286L.) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours. Requisite: course M186B. Special laboratory techniques and experience in biocybernetics research. Laboratory instruments, their use, design, and/or modiﬁcation for research in life sciences. Special research hardware, ﬁrmware, software. Use of simulation in experimental laboratory. Laboratory automation and safety. Comprehensive experiment design. Radioactive isotopes and kinetic studies. Experimental animals, controls. Concurrently scheduled with course CM186L. Letter grading.

287A. Theory of Program Structure. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 181. Models of computer programs and their syntax and semantics; emphasis on programs and recursion schemes; equivalence, optimization, correctness, and translatability of programs; expressive power of program constructs and data structures; selected current topics. Letter grading.

288S. Seminar: Theoretical Computer Science. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses 280A, 281A. Intended for students undertaking thesis research. Discussion of advanced topics and current research in such areas as algorithms and complexity models for parallel and concurrent computation, and formal language and automata theory. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

289A-289ZZ. Current Topics in Computer Theory. (2 to 12 each) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Review of current literature in an area of computer theory in which instructor has developed special proﬁciency as a consequence of research interests. Students report on selected topics. Letter grading:

289OA. Online Algorithms. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 180. Introduction to decision making under uncertainty and competitive analysis. Review of current research in online algorithms for problems arising in many areas, such as data and memory management, searching and navigating in unknown terrains, and server systems. Letter grading.

289RA. Randomized Algorithms. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Basic concepts and design techniques for randomized algorithms, such as probability theory, Markov chains, random walks, and probabilistic method. Applications to randomized algorithms in data structures, graph theory, computational geometry, number theory, and parallel and distributed systems. Letter grading.

M296A. Advanced Modeling Methodology for Dynamic Biomedical Systems. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M296A and Medicine M270C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Electrical Engineering 141 or 142 or Mathematics 115A or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 171A. Development of dynamic systems modeling methodology for physiological, biomedical, pharmacological, chemical, and related systems. Control system, multicompartmental, noncompartmental, and input/output models, linear and nonlinear. Emphasis on model applications, limitations, and relevance in biomedical sciences and other limited data environments. Problem solving in PC laboratory. Letter grading.

M296B. Optimal Parameter Estimation and Experiment Design for Biomedical Systems. (4) (Same as Biomathematics M270, Biomedical Engineering M296B, and Medicine M270D.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M296A or Biomathematics 220. Estimation methodology and model parameter estimation algorithms for ﬁtting dynamic system models to biomedical data. Model discrimination methods. Theory and algorithms for designing optimal experiments for developing and quantifying models, with special focus on optimal sampling schedule design for kinetic models. Exploration of PC software for model building and optimal experiment design via applications in physiology and pharmacology. Letter grading.

M296C. Advanced Topics and Research in Biomedical Systems Modeling and Computing. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M296C and Medicine M270E.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M296A. Recommended: course M296B. Research techniques and experience on special topics involving models, modeling methods, and model/computing in biological and medical sciences. Review and critique of literature. Research problem searching and formulation. Approaches to solutions. Individual M.S.- and Ph.D.-level project training. Letter grading.

M296D. Introduction to Computational Cardiology. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M296D.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M186B. Introduction to mathematical modeling and computer simulation of cardiac electrophysiological process. Ionic models of action potential (AP). Theory of AP propagation in one-dimensional and two-dimensional cardiac tissue. Simulation on sequential and parallel supercomputers, choice of numerical algorithms, to optimize accuracy and to provide computational stability. Letter grading.

298. Research Seminar: Computer Science. (2 to

4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Designed for graduate computer science students. Discussion of advanced topics and current research in algorithmic processes that describe and transform information: theory, analysis, design, efﬁciency, implementation, and application. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

375. Teaching Apprentice Practicum. (1 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Preparation: apprentice personnel employment as teaching assistant, associate, or fellow. Teaching apprenticeship under active guidance and supervision of regular faculty member responsible for curriculum and instruction at the University. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

495. Teaching Assistant Training Seminar. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to graduate Computer Science Department students. Seminar on communication of computer science materials in classroom: preparation, organization of material, presentation, use of visual aids, grading, advising, and rapport with students. S/U grading.

495B. Teaching with Technology. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, four hours. Limited to graduate Computer Science Department teaching assistants. Seminar for teaching assistants covering how technology can be used to aid instruction in and out of classroom. S/U grading.

497D-497E. Field Projects in Computer Science. (4-4) Fieldwork, to be arranged. Students are divided into teams led by instructor; each team is assigned an external company or organization which they investigate as a candidate for possible computerization, submitting a team report of their ﬁndings and recommendations. In Progress (497D) and S/U or letter (497E) grading.

596. Directed Individual or Tutorial Studies. (2 to

8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate computer science students. Petition forms to request enrollment may be obtained from assistant dean, Graduate Studies. Supervised investigation of advanced technical problems. S/U grading.

597A. Preparation for M.S. Comprehensive Examination. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate computer science students. Reading and preparation for M.S. comprehensive examination. S/U grading.

597B. Preparation for Ph.D. Preliminary Examinations. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate computer science students. S/U grading.

597C. Preparation for Ph.D. Oral Qualifying Examination. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate computer science students. Preparation for oral qualifying examination, including preliminary research on dissertation. S/U grading.