1. Electrical Engineering Physics I. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Mathematics 32A, 32B, Physics 1A, 1B. Introduction to modern physics and electromagnetism with engineering orientation. Emphasis on mathematical tools necessary to express and solve Maxwell equations. Relation of these concepts to waves propagating in free space, including dielectrics and optical systems. Letter grading.

2. Physics for Electrical Engineers. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 1. Introduction to concepts of modern physics necessary to understand solid-state devices, including elementary quantum theory, Fermi energies, and concepts of electrons in solids. Discussion of electrical properties of semiconductors leading to operation of junction devices. Letter grading.

3. Introduction to Electrical Engineering. (3) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, five hours. Introduction to field of electrical engineering: research and applications across several areas,

such as communications, control, electromagnetics, embedded computing, engineering optimization, integrated circuits, MEMS, nanotechnology, photonics and optoelectronics, plasma electronics, signal processing, and solid-state electronics. Letter grading.

10. Circuit Theory I. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Mathematics 33A, Physics 1B. Corequisite: Mathematics 33B. Introduction to linear circuit analysis. Resistive circuits, capacitors, inductors and ideal transformers, Kirchhoff laws, node and loop analysis, first-order circuits, second-order circuits, Thevenin and Norton theorem, sinusoidal steady state. Letter grading.

M16. Logic Design of Digital Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M51A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Introduction to digital systems. Specification and implementation of combinational and sequential systems. Standard logic modules and programmable logic arrays. Specification and implementation of algorithmic systems: data and control sections. Number systems and arithmetic algorithms. Error control codes for digital information. Letter grading.

Upper Division Courses

100. Electrical and Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 1 or Physics 1C, Mathematics 33A, 33B. Electrical quantities, linear circuit elements, circuit principles, signal waveforms, transient and steady state circuit behavior, semiconductor diodes and transistors, small signal models, and operational amplifiers. Letter grading.

101. Engineering Electromagnetics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 1 or Physics 1C, Mathematics 32A and 32B, or 33A and 33B. Electromagnetic field concepts, waves and phasors, transmission lines and Smith chart, transient responses, vector analysis, introduction to Maxwell equations, static and quasistatic electric and magnetic fields. Letter grading.

102. Systems and Signals. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: Mathematics 33A. Corequisite: Mathematics 33B. Elements of differential equations, first- and second-order equations, variation of parameters method and method of undetermined coefficients, existence and uniqueness. Systems: input/output description, linearity, time-invariance, and causality. Impulse response functions, superposition and convolution integrals. Laplace transforms and system functions. Fourier series and transforms. Frequency responses, responses of systems to periodic signals. Sampling theorem. Letter grading.

103. Applied Numerical Computing. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Civil Engineering 15 or Computer Science 31, Mathematics 33A, 33B (33B may be taken concurrently). Introduction to numerical computing and analysis. Floating point representation and round-off error; numerical methods for systems of linear equations; methods for systems of nonlinear equations. Introduction to numerical optimization, linear programming, least squares, interpolation, approximation, numerical integration; and differential equations. Letter grading.

110. Circuit Analysis II. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 10. Corequisite: course 102. Sinusoidal excitation and phasors, AC steady state analysis, AC steady state power, network functions, poles and zeros, frequency response, mutual inductance, ideal transformer, application of Laplace transforms to circuit analysis. Letter grading.

110L. Circuit Measurements Laboratory. (2) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisite: course 100 or 110. Experiments with basic circuits containing resistors, capacitors, inductors, and opamps. Ohm’s law voltage and current division, Thevenin and Norton equivalent circuits, superposition, transient and steady state analysis, and frequency response principles. Letter grading.

113. Digital Signal Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 102. Relationship between continuous-time and discrete-time signals. Z-transform. Discrete Fourier transform. Fast Fourier transform. Structures for digital filtering. Introduction to digital filter design techniques. Letter grading.

113D. Digital Signal Processing Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, six hours. Enforced requisite: course 113. Real-time implementation of digital signal processing algorithms on digital processor chips. Experiments involving A/D and D/A conversion, aliasing, digital filtering, sinusoidal oscillators, Fourier transforms, and finite word-length effects. Course project involving original design and implementation of signal processing systems for communications, speech, audio, or video using DSP chip. Letter grading.

114. Speech and Image Processing Systems Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Enforced requisite: course 113. Design principles of speech and image processing systems. Speech production, analysis, and modeling in first half of course; design techniques for image enhancement, filtering, and transformation in second half. Lectures supplemented by laboratory implementation of speech and image processing tasks. Letter grading.

115A. Analog Electronic Circuits I. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 110. Review of physics and operation of diodes and bipolar and MOS transistors. Equivalent circuits and models of semiconductor devices. Analysis and design of singlestage amplifiers. DC biasing circuits. Small-signal analysis. Operational amplifier systems. Letter grading.

115AL. Analog Electronics Laboratory I. (2) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Enforced requisites: courses 110L, 115A. Experimental determination of device characteristics, resistive diode circuits, single-stage amplifiers, compound transistor stages, effect of feedback on single-stage amplifiers, operational amplifiers, and operational amplifier circuits. Introduction to hands-on design experience based on individual student hardware design and implementation platforms. Letter grading.

115B. Analog Electronic Circuits II. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 115A. Analysis and design of differential amplifiers in bipolar and CMOS technologies. Current mirrors and active loads. Frequency response of amplifiers. Feedback and its properties. Stability issues and frequency compensation. Letter grading.

115BL. Analog Electronics Laboratory II. (4) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 115B. Recommended corequisite: course 115D. Study of high-frequency effects in discrete circuit design. Laboratory experiments include transmission lines, tuned amplifiers, oscillators, mixers, and broadband amplifiers. Hands-on experience in construction of surface-mount circuits and their characterization. Letter grading.

115C. Digital Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisites: course 115A, Computer Science M51A. Recommended: course 115B. Transistor-level digital circuit analysis and design. Modern logic families (static CMOS, pass-transistor, dynamic logic), integrated circuit (IC) layout, digital circuits (logic gates, flipflops/latches, counters, etc.), computer-aided simulation of digital circuits. Letter grading.

115D. Design Studies in Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, four hours; outside study, four hours. Enforced requisites: courses 115B, 115C. Applications of distributed circuits. Operational amplifier applications and limitations. Power amplifiers. Feedback and stability. Precision analog circuits. Analysis and design of operational amplifiers. Noise in electronic circuits. Design of oscillators, phase- 312 / Electrical Engineering

locked loops, and frequency synthesizers. Introduction to design of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters. Letter grading.

M116C. Computer Systems Architecture. (4) (Same as Computer Science M151B.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: course M16 or Computer Science M51A, Computer Science 33. Recommended: course M116L or Computer Science M152A, Computer Science 111. Computer system organization and design, implementation of CPU datapath and control, instruction set design, memory hierarchy (caches, main memory, virtual memory) organization and management, input/output subsystems (bus structures, interrupts, DMA), performance evaluation, pipelined processors. Letter grading.

M116L. Introductory Digital Design Laboratory. (2) (Same as Computer Science M152A.) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisite: course M16 or Computer Science M51A. Hands-on design, implementation, and debugging of digital logic circuits, use of computer-aided design tools for schematic capture and simulation, implementation of complex circuits using programmed array logic, design projects. Letter grading.

M117. Computer Networks: Physical Layer. (4) (Same as Computer Science M117.) Lecture, two hours; discussion, two hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Not open to students with credit for course M171L. Introduction to fundamental computer communication concepts underlying and supporting modern networks, with focus on wireless communications and media access layers of network protocol stack. Systems include wireless LANs (IEEE802.11) and ad hoc wireless and personal area networks (e.g., Bluetooth, ZigBee). Experimental project based on mobile radio-equipped devices (smart phones, tablets, etc.) as sensor platforms for personal applications such as wireless health, positioning, and environment awareness, and experimental laboratory sessions included. Letter grading.

121B. Principles of Semiconductor Device Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 2. Introduction to principles of operation of bipolar and MOS transistors, equivalent circuits, high-frequency behavior, voltage limitations. Letter grading.

122L. Semiconductor Devices Laboratory. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Enforced requisites: courses 2, 121B (may be taken concurrently). Design fabrication and characterization of p-n junction and transistors. Students perform various processing tasks such as wafer preparation, oxidation, diffusion, metallization, and photolithography. Letter grading.

123A. Fundamentals of Solid-State I. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 2 or Physics 1C. Limited to junior/senior engineering majors. Fundamentals of solid-state, introduction to quantum mechanics and quantum statistics applied to solid-state. Crystal structure, energy levels in solids, and band theory and semiconductor properties. Letter grading.

123B. Fundamentals of Solid-State II. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Enforced requisite: course 123A. Discussion of solid-state properties, lattice vibrations, thermal properties, dielectric, magnetic, and superconducting properties. Letter grading.

124. Semiconductor Physical Electronics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 123A. Band structure of semiconductors, experimental probes of basic band structure parameters, statistics of carriers, carrier transport properties at low fields, excess carrier transport properties, carrier recombination mechanisms, heterojunction properties. Letter grading.

128. Principles of Nanoelectronics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: course 1, or Physics 1A and 1B. Introduction to fundamentals of nanoscience for electronics nanosystems. Principles of fundamental quantities: electron charge, effective mass, Bohr magne-

ton, and spin, as well as theoretical approaches. From these nanoscale components, discussion of basic behaviors of nanosystems such as analysis of dynamics, variability, and noise, contrasted with those of scaled CMOS. Incorporation of design project in which students are challenged to design electronics nanosystems. Letter grading.

129D. Semiconductor Processing and Device Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, six hours. Enforced requisite: course 121B. Introduction to CAD tools used in integrated circuit processing and device design. Device structure optimization tool is based on PISCES; process integration tool is based on SUPREM. Course familiarizes students with those tools. Using CAD tools, CMOS process integration to be designed. Letter grading.

131A. Probability. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, 10 hours. Requisites: course 102, Mathematics 32B, 33B. Introduction to basic concepts of probability, including random variables and vectors, distributions and densities, moments, characteristic functions, and limit theorems. Applications to communication, control, and signal processing. Introduction to computer simulation and generation of random events. Letter grading.

131B. Introduction to Stochastic Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 131A. Introduction to concepts of stochastic processes, emphasizing continuous- and discrete-time stationary processes, correlation function and spectral density, linear transformation, and mean-square estimation. Applications to communication, control, and signal processing. Introduction to computer simulation and analysis of stochastic processes. Letter grading.

132A. Introduction to Communication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisites: courses 102, 113, 131A. Properties of signals and noise. Baseband pulse and digital signaling. Bandpass signaling techniques. Communication systems: digital transmission, frequency-division multiplexing and telephone systems, satellite communication systems. Performance of communication systems in presence of noise. Letter grading.

132B. Data Communications and Telecommunication Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 131A. Layered communications architectures. Queueing system modeling and analysis. Error control, flow and congestion control. Packet switching, circuit switching, and routing. Network performance analysis and design. Multiple-access communications: TDMA, FDMA, polling, random access. Local, metropolitan, wide area, integrated services networks. Letter grading.

136. Introduction to Engineering Optimization Techniques. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 103, Mathematics 32A, 33A. Introduction to optimization techniques for engineering and science students. Minimization of unconstrained functions of several variables: steepest descent, Newton/Raphson, conjugate gradient, and quasi-Newton methods. Rates of convergence. Methods for constrained minimization: introduction to linear programming and gradient projection methods. Lagrangian methods. Students expected to use SEASnet computers. Letter grading.

141. Principles of Feedback Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 102. Mathematical modeling of physical control systems in form of differential equations and transfer functions. Design problems, system performance indices of feedback control systems via classical techniques, root-locus and frequency-domain methods. Computer-aided solution of design problems from real world. Letter grading.

142. Linear Systems: State-Space Approach. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 102. State-space methods of linear system analysis and synthesis, with application to problems in networks, control, and system modeling. Letter grading.

CM150. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (4) (Same as Bioengineering CM150 and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering CM180.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students design microfabrication processes capable of achieving desired MEMS device. Concurrently scheduled with course CM250A. Letter grading.

150DL. Photonic Sensor Design Laboratory. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to seniors. Multidisciplinary course with lectures and laboratory experiments on optical sensors. Fundamentals of intensity and interference-based transducers, polarimeters, multiplexing and sensor networks, physical and biomedical sensors. Design and implementation of optical gyroscope, computer interfacing, and signal processing. Letter grading.

CM150L. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Laboratory. (2) (Same as Bioengineering CM150L and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering CM180L.) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, one hour. Requisites: course CM150, Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Hands-on introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) laboratory. Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students go through process of fabricating MEMS device. Concurrently scheduled with course CM250L. Letter grading.

161. Electromagnetic Waves. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 101. Time-varying fields and Maxwell equations, plane wave propagation and interaction with media, energy flow and Poynting vector, guided waves in waveguides, phase and group velocity, radiation and antennas. Letter grading.

162A. Wireless Communication Links and Antennas. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 161. Basic properties of transmitting and receiving antennas and antenna arrays. Array synthesis. Adaptive arrays. Friis transmission formula, radar equations. Cell-site and mobile antennas, bandwidth budget. Noise in communication systems (transmission lines, antennas, atmospheric, etc.). Cell-site and mobile antennas, cell coverage for signal and traffic, interference, multipath fading, ray bending, and other propagation phenomena. Letter grading.

163A. Introductory Microwave Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 161. Transmission lines description of waveguides, impedance transformers, power dividers, directional couplers, filters, hybrid junctions, nonreciprocal devices. Letter grading.

163B. Microwave and Millimeter Wave Active Devices. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 121B. MESFET, HEMT, HBT, IMPATT, Gunn, small signal models, noise model, large signal model, loadpull method, parameter extraction technique. Letter grading.

163C. Active Microwave Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Enforced requisites: courses 115A, 161. Theory and design of microwave transistor amplifiers and oscillators; stability, noise, distortion. Letter grading.

164D. Microwave Wireless Design. (4) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 161. Microwave integrated circuit design from wireless system perspective, with focus on (1) use of microwave circuit simula- Electrical Engineering / 313

tion tools, (2) design of wireless frontend circuits including low noise amplifier, mixer, and power amplifier, (3) knowledge and skills required in wireless integrated circuit characterization and implementation. Letter grading.

164L. Microwave Wireless Laboratory. (2) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, three hours; outside study, three hours. Enforced requisite: course 161. Measurement techniques and instrumentation for active and passive microwave components; cavity resonators, waveguides, wavemeters, slotted lines, directional couplers. Design, fabrication, and characterization of microwave circuits in microstrip and coaxial systems. Letter grading.

170L. Laser Laboratory. (4) (Formerly numbered 172L.) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite or corequisite: course 101. Properties of lasers, including saturation, gain, mode structure. Laser applications, including optics, modulation, communication, holography, and interferometry. Letter grading.

M171L. Data Communication Systems Laboratory. (2 to 4) (Same as Computer Science M171L.) Laboratory, four to eight hours; outside study, two to four hours. Recommended preparation: course M116L. Limited to seniors. Not open to students with credit for course M117. Interpretation of analog-signaling aspects of digital systems and data communications through experience in using contemporary test instruments to generate and display signals in relevant laboratory setups. Use of oscilloscopes, pulse and function generators, baseband spectrum analyzers, desktop computers, terminals, modems, PCs, and workstations in experiments on pulse transmission impairments, waveforms and their spectra, modem and terminal characteristics, and interfaces. Letter grading.

172. Introduction to Lasers and Quantum Electronics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 101. Physical applications and principles of lasers, Gaussian optics, resonant cavities, atomic radiation, laser oscillation and amplification, cw and pulsed lasers. Letter grading.

173. Photonic Devices. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 101. Introduction to basic principles of photonic devices. Topics include crystal optics, dielectric optical waveguides, waveguide couplers, electro-optic devices, magneto-optic devices, acousto-optic devices, second-harmonic generation, optical Kerr effect, optical switching devices. Letter grading.

173D. Photonics and Communication Design. (4) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, three hours; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 101. Recommended: course 132A. Introduction to measurement of basic photonic devices, including LEDs, lasers, detectors, and amplifiers; fiber-optic fundamentals and measurement of fiber systems. Modulation techniques, including A.M., F.M., phase and suppressed carrier methods. Possible projects include lasers, optical communication, and biomedical imaging and sensing. Letter grading.

174. Semiconductor Optoelectronics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Enforced requisite: course 172. Introduction to semiconductor optoelectronic devices for optical communications, interconnects, and signal processing. Basic optical properties of semiconductors, pin photodiodes, avalanche photodiode detectors (APD), lightemitting diodes (LED), semiconductor lasers, optical modulators and amplifiers, and typical photonic systems. Letter grading.

176. Photonics in Biomedical Applications. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course 101. Study of different types of optical systems and their physics background. Examination of their roles in current and projected biomedical applications. Specific capabilities of photonics to be related to each example. Letter grading.

180D. Systems Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to senior Electrical Engineering majors. Advanced systems design integrating communications, control, and signal processing subsystems. Different project to be assigned yearly in which student teams create high-performance designs that manage trade-offs among subsystems. Letter grading.

181D. Robotic Systems Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: courses M16, 110L, M116L (or Computer Science M152A), Computer Science 31, 33. Recommended: courses 113, 141, Computer Science 35L. Design of robotics systems that combine embedded hardware, software, mechanical subsystems, and fundamental algorithms for sensing and control to expose students to basic concepts in robotics and current state of art. Lecture closely tied to design laboratory where students work in teams to construct series of subsystems leading to final project. Letter grading.

184DA-184DB. Independent Group Project Design. (2-2) (Formerly numbered 184D.) Laboratory, five hours; discussion, one hour. Enforced requisites: courses M16, 110, 110L. Course 184DA is enforced requisite to 184DB. Courses centered on group project that runs year long to give students intensive experience on hardware design, microcontroller programming, and project coordination. Several projects based on autonomous robots that traverse small mazes and courses offered yearly and target regional competitions. Students may submit proposals that are evaluated and approved by faculty members. Topics include sensing circuits and amplifier-based design, microcontroller programming, feedback control, actuation, and motor control. In Progress (184DA) and letter (184DB) grading.

M185. Introduction to Plasma Electronics. (4) (Same as Physics M122.) Lecture, three hours. Requisite: course 101 or Physics 110A. Senior-level introductory course on electrodynamics of ionized gases and applications to materials processing, generation of coherent radiation and particle beams, and renewable energy sources. Letter grading.

188. Special Courses in Electrical Engineering. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in electrical engineering for undergraduate students taught on experimental or temporary basis, such as those taught by resident and visiting faculty members. May be repeated once for credit with topic or instructor change. Letter grading.

194. Research Group Seminars: Electrical Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for undergraduate students who are part of research group. Discussion of research methods and current literature in field. May be repeated for credit. Letter grading.

199. Directed Research in Electrical Engineering. (2 to 8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to juniors/seniors. Supervised individual research or investigation under guidance of faculty mentor. Culminating paper or project required. May be repeated for credit with school approval. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Office of Academic and Student Affairs. Letter grading.

Graduate Courses

201A. VLSI Design Automation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 115C. Fundamentals of design automation of VLSI circuits and systems, including introduction to circuit and system platforms such as field programmable gate arrays and multicore systems; high-level synthesis, logic synthesis, and technology mapping; physical design; and testing and verification. Letter grading.

201C. Modeling of VLSI Circuits and Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours. Requisite: course 115C. Detailed study of VLSI circuit and system models considering performance, signal integrity, power and thermal effects, reliability, and manufacturability. Discussion of principles of modeling and optimization codevelopment. Letter grading.

M202A. Embedded Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M213A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Methodologies and technologies for design of embedded systems. Topics include hardware and software platforms for embedded systems, techniques for modeling and specification of system behavior, software organization, real-time operating system scheduling, real-time communication and packet scheduling, low-power battery and energy-aware system design, timing synchronization, fault tolerance and debugging, and techniques for hardware and software architecture optimization. Theoretical foundations as well as practical design methods. Letter grading.

M202B. Distributed Embedded Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M213B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 132B or Computer Science 118, and Computer Science 111. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Interdisciplinary course with focus on study of distributed embedded systems concepts needed to realize systems such as wireless sensor and actuator networks for monitoring and control of physical world. Topics include network self-configuration with localization and timing synchronization; energy-aware system design and operation; protocols for MAC, routing, transport, disruption tolerance; programming issues and models with language, OS, database, and middleware; in-network collaborative processing; fundamental characteristics such as coverage, connectivity, capacity, latency; techniques for exploitation and management of actuation and mobility; data and system integrity issues with calibration, faults, debugging, and security; and usage issues such as human interfaces and safety. Letter grading.

202C. Networked Embedded Systems Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Training in combination of networked embedded systems design combining embedded hardware platform, embedded operating system, and hardware/software interface. Essential graduate student background for research and industry career paths in wireless devices for applications ranging from conventional wireless mobile devices to new area of wireless health. Laboratory design modules and course projects based on state-of-art embedded hardware platform. Letter grading.

205A. Matrix Analysis for Scientists and Engineers. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: one undergraduate linear algebra course. Designed for first-year graduate students in all branches of engineering, science, and related disciplines. Introduction to matrix theory and linear algebra, language in which virtually all of modern science and engineering is conducted. Review of matrices taught in undergraduate courses and introduction to graduate-level topics. Letter grading.

208A. Analytical Methods of Engineering I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to graduate students. Application of techniques of linear algebra to engineering problems. Vector spaces: scalar products, Cauchy/Schwarz inequality. Gram/Schmidt orthogonalization. Matrices as linear transformations: eigenvalues and spectrum. Self-adjoint and covariance matrices. Square root and factorization, Cholesky decomposition. Determinants, Cayley/Hamilton theorem. Minimal polynomials, Bezout theorem. Polar and singular value decomposition. Sequences, convergence, and matrix exponential. Applications to problems in signal processing, communications, and control. Letter grading.

M208B. Functional Analysis for Applied Mathematics and Engineering. (4) (Same as Mathematics M268A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 208A (or Mathematics 115A and 115B), Mathematics 131A, 131B, 132. Topics may include L^{p} spaces, Hilbert, Banach, and separable spaces; Fourier transforms; linear functionals. Riesz representation theory, linear operators and their adjoints; self-adjoint and compact operators. 314 / Electrical Engineering

Spectral theory. Differential operators such as Laplacian and eigenvalue problems. Resolvent distributions and Green’s functions. Semigroups. Applications. S/U or letter grading.

M208C. Topics in Functional Analysis for Applied Mathematics and Engineering. (4) (Same as Mathematics M268B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M208B. Semigroups of linear operators over Hilbert spaces; generator and resolvent, generation theorems, Laplace inversion formula. Dissipative operators and contraction semigroups. Analytic semigroups and spectral representation. Semigroups with compact resolvents. Parabolic and hyperbolic systems. Controllability and stabilizability. Spectral theory of differential operators, PDEs, generalized functions. S/U or letter grading.

209AS. Special Topics in Circuits and Embedded Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in one or more aspects of circuits and embedded systems, such as digital, analog, mixed-signal, and radio frequency integrated circuits (RF ICs); electronic design automation; wireless communication circuits and systems; embedded processor architectures; embedded software; distributed sensor and actuator networks; robotics; and embedded security. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U or letter grading.

209BS. Seminar: Circuits and Embedded Systems. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Seminars and discussions on current and advanced topics in one or more aspects of circuits and embedded systems, such as digital, analog, mixed-signal, and radio frequency integrated circuits (RF ICs); electronic design automation; wireless communication circuits and systems; embedded processor architectures; embedded software; distributed sensor and actuator networks; robotics; and embedded security. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

210A. Adaptive Filtering. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 113, 131B, Mathematics 115A. Optimal filtering and estimation, Wiener filters, linear prediction. Steepest descent and stochastic gradient algorithms. Frequency-domain adaptive filters. Method of least squares, recursive least squares, fast fixed-order and order-recursive (lattice) filters. Misadjustment, convergence, and tracking analyses, stability issues, finite precision effects. Connections with Kalman filtering. Nonlinear adaptive filters. Letter grading.

210B. Optimal Linear Estimation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 113, 131B, 210A, Mathematics 115A. Unified treatment of fundamental concepts and basic notions in adaptive filtering, Wiener filtering, Kalman filtering, and H_oo filtering. Emphasis on geometric, equivalence, and duality arguments. Development of array methods and fast algorithms. Discussion of practical issues. Examples of applications from fields of signal processing, communications, biomedical engineering, finance, and control. Letter grading.

211A. Digital Image Processing I. (4) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, five hours. Preparation: computer programming experience. Requisite: course 113. Fundamentals of digital image processing theory and techniques. Topics include two-dimensional linear system theory, image transforms, and enhancement. Concepts covered in lecture applied in computer laboratory assignments. Letter grading.

212A. Theory and Design of Digital Filters. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 113. Approximation of filter specifications. Use of design charts. Structures for recursive digital filters. FIR filter design techniques. Comparison of IIR and FIR structures. Implementation of digital filters. Limit cycles. Overflow oscillations. Discrete random signals. Wave digital filters. Letter grading.

212B. Multirate Systems and Filter Banks. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisite: course 212A. Fundamentals of multirate systems; polyphase representation; multistage implementa-

tions; applications of multirate systems; maximally decimated filter banks; perfect reconstruction systems; paraunitary filter banks; wavelet transform and its relation to multirate filter banks. Letter grading.

213A. Advanced Digital Signal Processing Circuit Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisite: course 212A. Digital filter design and optimization tools, architectures for digital signal processing circuits; integrated circuit modules for digital signal processing; programmable signal processors; CAD tools and cell libraries for application-specific integrated circuit design; case studies of speech and image processing circuits. Letter grading.

M214A. Digital Speech Processing. (4) (Same as Bioengineering M214A.) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 113. Theory and applications of digital processing of speech signals. Mathematical models of human speech production and perception mechanisms, speech analysis/synthesis. Techniques include linear prediction, filter-bank models, and homomorphic filtering. Applications to speech synthesis, automatic recognition, and hearing aids. Letter grading.

214B. Advanced Topics in Speech Processing. (4) Lecture, three hours; computer assignments, two hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course M214A. Advanced techniques used in various speech-processing applications, with focus on speech recognition by humans and machine. Physiology and psychoacoustics of human perception. Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) for automatic speech recognition systems, pattern classification, and search algorithms. Aids for hearing impaired. Letter grading.

215A. Analog Integrated Circuit Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 115B. Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits. MOS and bipolar device structures and models, single-stage and differential amplifiers, noise, feedback, operational amplifiers, offset and distortion, sampling devices and discrete-time circuits, bandgap references. Letter grading.

215B. Advanced Digital Integrated Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 115C, M216A. Analysis and comparison of modern logic families. VLSI memories (SRAM, DRAM, and ROMs). Accuracy of various simulation models and simulation methods for digital circuits. Letter grading.

215C. Analysis and Design of RF Circuits and Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 215A. Principles of RF circuit and system design, with emphasis on monolithic implementation in VLSI technologies. Basic concepts, communications background, transceiver architectures, low-noise amplifiers and mixers, oscillators, frequency synthesizers, power amplifiers. Letter grading.

215D. Analog Microsystem Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 215A. Analysis and design of data conversion interfaces and filters. Sampling circuits and architectures, D/A conversion techniques, A/D converter architectures, building blocks, precision techniques, discrete- and continuous-time filters. Letter grading.

215E. Signaling and Synchronization. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 215A, M216A. Analysis and design of circuits for synchronization and communication for VLSI systems. Use of both digital and analog design techniques to improve data rate of electronics between functional blocks, chips, and systems. Advanced clocking methodologies, phase-locked loop design for clock generation, and high-performance wire-line transmitters, receivers, and timing recovery circuits. Letter grading.

M216A. Design of VLSI Circuits and Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M258A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, three hours. Requisites: courses M16 or Computer Science M51A, and 115A. Recommended: course 115C. LSI/VLSI design and application in

computer systems. Fundamental design techniques that can be used to implement complex integrated systems on chips. Letter grading.

216B. VLSI Signal Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Advanced concepts in VLSI signal processing, with emphasis on architecture design and optimization within block-based description that can be mapped to hardware. Fundamental concepts from digital signal processing (DSP) theory, architecture, and circuit design applied to complex DSP algorithms in emerging applications for personal communications and healthcare. Letter grading.

M216C. LSI in Computer System Design. (4) (Same as Computer Science M258C.) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisite: course M216A. LSI/VLSI design and application in computer systems. In-depth studies of VLSI architectures and VLSI design tools. Letter grading.

M217. Biomedical Imaging. (4) (Same as Bioengineering M217.) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisite: course 114 or 211A. Optical imaging modalities in biomedicine. Other nonoptical imaging modalities discussed briefly for comparison purposes. Letter grading.

218. Network Economics and Game Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Discussion of how different cooperative and noncooperative games among agents can be constructed to model, analyze, optimize, and shape emerging interactions among users in different networks and system settings. How strategic agents can successfully compete with each other for limited and time-varying resources by optimizing their decision process and learning from their past interaction with other agents. To determine their optimal actions in these distributed, informationally decentralized environments, agents need to learn and model directly or implicitly other agents’ responses to their actions. Discussion in detail of several existing multiagent learning techniques that can be successfully deployed in multiagent systems. Letter grading.

221A. Physics of Semiconductor Devices I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Physical principles and design considerations of junction devices. Letter grading.

221B. Physics of Semiconductor Devices II. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Principles and design considerations of field effect devices and charge-coupled devices. Letter grading.

221C. Microwave Semiconductor Devices. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Physical principles and design considerations of microwave solid-state devices: Schottky barrier mixer diodes, IMPATT diodes, transferred electron devices, tunnel diodes, microwave transistors. Letter grading.

222. Integrated Circuits Fabrication Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 2. Principles of integrated circuits fabrication processes. Technological limitations of integrated circuits design. Topics include bulk crystal and epitaxial growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ionimplantation, chemical vapor deposition, dry etching, lithography, and metallization. Introduction of advanced process simulation tools. Letter grading.

223. Solid-State Electronics I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 124, 270. Energy band theory, electronic band structure of various elementary, compound, and alloy semiconductors, defects in semiconductors. Recombination mechanisms, transport properties. Letter grading.

224. Solid-State Electronics II. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course

223. Techniques to solve Boltzmann transport equation, various scattering mechanisms in semiconductors, high field transport properties in semiconductors, Monte Carlo method in transport. Optical properties. Letter grading. Electrical Engineering / 315

225. Physics of Semiconductor Nanostructures and Devices. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 223. Theoretical methods for circulating electronics and optical properties of semiconductor structures. Quantum size effects and low-dimensional systems. Application to semiconductor nanometer scale devices, including negative resistance diodes, transistors, and detectors. Letter grading.

229. Seminar: Advanced Topics in Solid-State Electronics. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 223, 224. Current research areas, such as radiation effects in semiconductor devices, diffusion in semiconductors, optical and microwave semiconductor devices, nonlinear optics, and electron emission. Letter grading.

229S. Advanced Electrical Engineering Seminar. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Preparation: successful completion of Ph.D. major field examination. Seminar on current research topics in solid-state and quantum electronics (Section 1) or in electronic circuit theory and applications (Section 2). Students report on tutorial topic and on research topic in their dissertation area. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

230A. Estimation and Detection in Communication and Radar Engineering. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Applications of estimation and detection concepts in communication and radar engineering; random signal and noise characterizations by analytical and simulation methods; mean square (MS) and maximum likelihood (ML) estimations and algorithms; detection under ML, Bayes, and Neyman/Pearson (NP) criteria; signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and error probability evaluations. Letter grading.

230B. Digital Communication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 132A, 230A. Basic concepts of digital communication systems; representation of bandpass waveforms; signal space analysis and optimum receivers in Gaussian noise; comparison of digital modulation methods; synchronization and adaptive equalization; applications to modern communication systems. Letter grading.

230C. Algorithms and Processing in Communication and Radar. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230A. Concepts and implementations of digital signal processing algorithms in communication and radar systems. Optimum dynamic range scaling for random data. Algorithms for fast convolution and transform. Spectral estimation algorithms. Parallel processing, VLSI algorithms, and systolic arrays. Letter grading.

230D. Signal Processing in Communications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230C. Basic digital signal processing techniques for estimation and detection of signals in communication and radar systems. Optimization of dynamic range, quantization, and state constraints; DFT, convolution, FFT, NTT, Winograd DFT, systolic array; spectral analysis-windowing, AR, and ARMA; system applications. Letter grading.

231A. Information Theory: Channel and Source Coding. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Fundamental limits on compression and transmission of information. Topics include limits and algorithms for lossless data compression, channel capacity, rate versus distortion in lossy compression, and information theory for multiple users. Letter grading.

231E. Channel Coding Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131A. Fundamentals of error control codes and decoding algorithms. Topics include block codes, convolutional codes, trellis codes, and turbo codes. Letter grading.

232A. Stochastic Modeling with Applications to Telecommunication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Introduction to stochastic processes as applied to study of telecommu-

nication systems and traffic engineering. Renewal theory; discrete-time Markov chains; continuous-time Markov jump processes. Applications to traffic and queueing analysis of basic telecommunication system models. Letter grading.

232B. Telecommunication Switching and Queueing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232A. Queue modeling and analysis with applications to space-time digital switching systems and to integrated-service telecommunication systems. Fundamentals of traffic engineering and queueing theory. Queue size, waiting time, busy period, blocking, and stochastic process analysis for Markovian and non-Markovian models. Letter grading.

232C. Telecommunication Architecture and Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232B. Analysis and design of integrated-service telecommunication networks and multiple-access procedures. Stochastic analysis of priority-based queueing system models. Queueing networks; network protocol architectures; error control; routing, flow, and access control. Applications to local-area, packet-radio, satellite, and computer communication networks. Letter grading.

232D. Telecommunication Networks and MultipleAccess Communications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232B. Performance analysis and design of telecommunication networks and multiple-access communication systems. Topics include architectures, multiplexing and multiple-access, message delays, error/flow control, switching, routing, protocols. Applications to local-area, packet-radio, local-distribution, computer and satellite communication networks. Letter grading.

232E. Graphs and Network Flows. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 136. Solution to analysis and synthesis problems that may be formulated as flow problems in capacity constrained (or cost constrained) networks. Development of tools of network flow theory using graph theoretic methods; application to communication, transportation, and transmission problems. Letter grading.

233. Wireless Communications Systems. (4) (Formerly numbered 233B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230B. Various aspects of physical layer and medium access design for wireless communications systems. Topics include wireless signal propagation and channel modeling, single carrier and spread spectrum modulation for wireless systems, diversity techniques, multiple-access schemes, transceiver design and effects of nonideal components, hardware partitioning issues. Case study highlights system level trade-offs. Letter grading.

236A. Linear Programming. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Mathematics 115A or equivalent knowledge of linear algebra. Basic graduate course in linear optimization. Geometry of linear programming. Duality. Simplex method. Interior-point methods. Decomposition and large-scale linear programming. Quadratic programming and complementary pivot theory. Engineering applications. Introduction to integer linear programming and computational complexity theory. Letter grading.

236B. Convex Optimization. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 236A. Introduction to convex optimization and its applications. Convex sets, functions, and basics of convex analysis. Convex optimization problems (linear and quadratic programming, second-order cone and semidefinite programming, geometric programming). Lagrange duality and optimality conditions. Applications of convex optimization. Unconstrained minimization methods. Interior-point and cutting-plane algorithms. Introduction to nonlinear programming. Letter grading.

236C. Optimization Methods for Large-Scale Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 236B. Theory and computational procedures for decomposing large-scale optimization problems: cutting-plane methods, column generation, decomposition algorithms. Techniques for global continuous optimization: branch-and-bound

methods, reverse convex programming, bilinear and biconvex optimization, genetic algorithms, simulated annealing. Introduction to combinatorial optimization. Letter grading.

M237. Dynamic Programming. (4) (Same as Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M276.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisite: course 232A or 236A or 236B. Introduction to mathematical analysis of sequential decision processes. Finite horizon model in both deterministic and stochastic cases. Finite-state infinite horizon model. Methods of solution. Examples from inventory theory, finance, optimal control and estimation, Markov decision processes, combinatorial optimization, communications. Letter grading.

238. Multimedia Communications and Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 113, 131A. Key concepts, principles, and algorithms of real-time multimedia communications and processing across heterogeneous Internet and wireless channels. Due to flexible and low-cost infrastructure, new networks and communication channels enable variety of delay-sensitive multimedia transmission applications and provide varying resources with limited support for quality of service required by delay-sensitive, bandwidth-intense, and loss-tolerant multimedia applications. New concepts, principles, theories, and practical solutions for cross-layer design that can provide optimal adaptation for time-varying channel characteristics, adaptive and delay-sensitive applications, and multiuser transmission environments. Letter grading.

239AS. Special Topics in Signals and Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in one or more aspects of signals and systems, such as communications, control, image processing, information theory, multimedia, computer networking, optimization, speech processing, telecommunications, and VLSI signal processing. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U or letter grading.

239BS. Seminar: Signals and Systems. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Seminars and discussions on current and advanced topics in one or more aspects of signals and systems, such as communications, control, image processing, information theory, multimedia, computer networking, optimization, speech processing, telecommunications, and VLSI signal processing. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

M240A. Linear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 141 or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 171A. State-space description of linear time-invariant (LTI) and time-varying (LTV) systems in continuous and discrete time. Linear algebra concepts such as eigenvalues and eigenvectors, singular values, Cayley/Hamilton theorem, Jordan form; solution of state equations; stability, controllability, observability, realizability, and minimality. Stabilization design via state feedback and observers; separation principle. Connections with transfer function techniques. Letter grading.

240B. Linear Optimal Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 141, M240A. Introduction to optimal control, with emphasis on detailed study of LQR, or linear regulators with quadratic cost criteria. Relationships to classical control system design. Letter grading.

M240C. Optimal Control. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280C and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 240B. Applications of variational methods, Pontryagin maximum principle, Hamilton/Jacobi/Bellman equation (dynamic programming) to optimal control of dynamic systems modeled by nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Letter grading.

241A. Stochastic Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131B. Random process models: basic concepts, properties. Stationary random processes: covariance 316 / Electrical Engineering

and spectrum. Response of linear systems to random inputs: discrete-time and continuous-time models. Time averages and ergodic principle. Sampling principle and interpolation. Simulation of random processes. Letter grading.

241C. Stochastic Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 240B, 241B. Linear quadratic Gaussian theory of optimal feedback control of stochastic systems; discrete-time state-space models; sigma algebra equivalence and separation principle; dynamic programming; compensator design for time invariant systems; feedforward control and servomechanisms, extensions to nonlinear systems; applications to interception guidance, gust alleviation. Letter grading.

M242A. Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M282A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M272A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M240A or Chemical Engineering M280A or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A. State-space techniques for studying solutions of time-invariant and time-varying nonlinear dynamic systems with emphasis on stability. Lyapunov theory (including converse theorems), invariance, center manifold theorem, input-to-state stability and small-gain theorem. Letter grading.

243. Robust and Optimal Control by Convex Methods. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M240A. Multivariable robust control, including H2 and H-infinity optimal control and robust performance analysis and synthesis against structured uncertainty. Emphasis on convex methods for analysis and design, in particular linear matrix inequality (LMI) approach to control. Letter grading.

M248S. Seminar: Systems, Dynamics, and Control Topics. (2) (Same as Chemical Engineering M297 and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M299A.) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to graduate engineering students. Presentations of research topics by leading academic researchers from fields of systems, dynamics, and control. Students who work in these fields present their papers and results. S/U grading.

CM250A. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (4) (Same as Bioengineering CM250A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering CM280A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students design microfabrication processes capable of achieving desired MEMS device. Concurrently scheduled with course CM150. Letter grading.

M250B. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Fabrication. (4) (Same as Bioengineering M250B and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M280B.) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course CM150 or CM250A. Advanced discussion of micromachining processes used to construct MEMS. Coverage of many lithographic, deposition, and etching processes, as well as their combination in process integration. Materials issues such as chemical resistance, corrosion, mechanical properties, and residual/intrinsic stress. Letter grading.

CM250L. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Laboratory. (2) (Same as Bioengineering CM250L and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering CM280L.) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, one hour. Requisites: course CM250A, Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Hands-on introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) laboratory. Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators.

Students go through process of fabricating MEMS device. Concurrently scheduled with course CM150L. Letter grading.

M252. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Device Physics and Design. (4) (Same as Bioengineering M252 and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M282.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Introduction to MEMS design. Design methods, design rules, sensing and actuation mechanisms, microsensors, and microactuators. Designing MEMS to be produced with both foundry and nonfoundry processes. Computer-aided design for MEMS. Design project required. Letter grading.

M255. Neuroengineering. (4) (Same as Bioengineering M260 and Neuroscience M206.) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, three hours; outside study, five hours. Requisites: Mathematics 32A, Physics 1B or 6B. Introduction to principles and technologies of bioelectricity and neural signal recording, processing, and stimulation. Topics include bioelectricity, electrophysiology (action potentials, local field potentials, EEG, ECOG), intracellular and extracellular recording, microelectrode technology, neural signal processing (neural signal frequency bands, filtering, spike detection, spike sorting, stimulation artifact removal), brain-computer interfaces, deep-brain stimulation, and prosthetics. Letter grading.

M256A-M256B-M256C. Evaluation of Research Literature in Neuroengineering. (2-2-2) (Same as Bioengineering M261A-M261B-M261C and Neuroscience M212A-M212B-M212C.) Discussion, two hours; outside study, four hours. Critical discussion and analysis of current literature related to neuroengineering research. S/U grading.

M257. Nanoscience and Technology. (4) (Same as Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M287.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Enforced requisite: course CM250A. Introduction to fundamentals of nanoscale science and technology. Basic physical principles, quantum mechanics, chemical bonding and nanostructures, top-down and bottom-up (self-assembly) nanofabrication; nanocharacterization; nanomaterials, nanoelectronics, and nanobiodetection technology. Introduction to new knowledge and techniques in nano areas to understand scientific principles behind nanotechnology and inspire students to create new ideas in multidisciplinary nano areas. Letter grading.

260A. Advanced Engineering Electrodynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 161, 162A. Advanced treatment of concepts in electrodynamics and their applications to modern engineering problems. Vector calculus in generalized coordinate system. Solutions of wave equation and special functions. Reflection, transmission, and polarization. Vector potential, duality, reciprocity, and equivalence theorems. Scattering from cylinder, half-plane, wedge, and sphere, including radar cross-section characterization. Green's functions in electromagnetics and dyadic calculus. Letter grading.

260B. Advanced Engineering Electrodynamics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 161, 162A, 260A. Advanced treatment of concepts and numerical techniques in electrodynamics and their applications to modern engineering problems. Differential geometry of curves and surfaces. Geometrical optics and geometrical theory of diffraction. Physical optics techniques. Asymptotic techniques and uniform theories. Integral equations in electromagnetics. Numerical techniques based on method of moments. Letter grading.

261. Microwave and Millimeter Wave Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 163A. Rectangular and circular waveguides, microstrip, stripline, finline, and dielectric waveguide distributed circuits, with applications in microwave and millimeter wave integrated circuits. Substrate materials, surface wave phenomena. Analytical methods for discontinuity effects. Design of passive microwave and millimeter wave circuits. Letter grading.

262. Antenna Theory and Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 162A. Antenna patterns. Sum and difference patterns. Optimum designs for rectangular and circular apertures. Arbitrary side lobe topography. Discrete arrays. Mutual coupling. Design of feeding networks. Letter grading.

263. Reflector Antennas Synthesis, Analysis, and Measurement. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 260A, 260B. Reflector pattern analysis techniques. Single and multireflector antenna configurations. Reflector synthesis techniques. Reflector feeds. Reflector tolerance studies, including systematic and random errors. Array-fed reflector antennas. Near-field measurement techniques. Compact range concepts. Microwave diagnostic techniques. Modern satellite and ground antenna applications. Letter grading.

266. Computational Methods for Electromagnetics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 162A, 163A. Computational techniques for partial differential and integral equations: finite-difference, finite-element, method of moments. Applications include transmission lines, resonators, integrated circuits, solid-state device modeling, electromagnetic scattering, and antennas. Letter grading.

270. Applied Quantum Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: modern physics (or course 123A), linear algebra, and ordinary differential equations courses. Principles of quantum mechanics for applications in lasers, solid-state physics, and nonlinear optics. Topics include eigenfunction expansions, observables, Schrödinger equation, uncertainty principle, central force problems, Hilbert spaces, WKB approximation, matrix mechanics, density matrix formalism, and radiation theory. Letter grading.

271. Classical Laser Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 172. Microscopic and macroscopic laser phenomena and propagation of optical pulses using classical formalism. Letter grading.

272. Dynamics of Lasers. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 271. Ultrashort laser pulse characteristics, generation, and measurement. Gain switching, Q switching, cavity dumping, active and passive mode locking. Pulse compression and soliton pulse formation. Nonlinear pulse generation: soliton laser, additive-pulse mode locking, and parametric oscillators. Pulse measurement techniques. Letter grading.

273. Nonlinear Photonics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 173. Nonlinear optical susceptibilities. Coupled-wave and coupled-mode theories. Crystal optics, electro-optics, and magneto-optics. Nonlinear optical interactions, sum- and difference-frequency generation, harmonic and parametric generation, stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering, field-induced index changes and self-phase modulation. Nonlinear photonic devices. Nonlinear guided-wave photonics and devices. Letter grading.

274. Fiber Optic System Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: courses 173D and/or 174. Top-down introduction to physical layer design in fiber optic communication systems, including Telecom, Datacom, and CATV. Fundamentals of digital and analog optical communication systems, fiber transmission characteristics, and optical modulation techniques, including direct and external modulation and computer-aided design. Architectural-level design of fiber optic transceiver circuits, including preamplifier, quantizer, clock and data recovery, laser driver, and predistortion circuits. Letter grading.

279AS. Special Topics in Physical and Wave Electronics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in one or more aspects of physical and wave electronics, such as electromagnetics, microwave and millimeter wave circuits, photonics and optoelectronics, plasma electronics, microelectro- Engineering Schoolwide Programs / 317

mechanical systems, solid state, and nanotechnology. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U or letter grading.

279BS. Seminar: Physical and Wave Electronics. (2 to 4) Seminar, two to four hours; outside study, four to eight hours. Seminars and discussions on current and advanced topics in one or more aspects of physical and wave electronics, such as electromagnetics, microwave and millimeter wave circuits, photonics and optoelectronics, plasma electronics, microelectromechanical systems, solid state, and nanotechnology. May be repeated for credit with topic change. S/U grading.

279CS. Clean Green IGERT Brown-Bag Seminar. (1) Seminar, one hour. Required of students in Clean Energy for Green Industry (IGERT) Research. Literature seminar presented by graduate students and experts from around country who conduct research in energy harvest, storage, and conservation. S/U grading.

285A. Plasma Waves and Instabilities. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 101, and M185 or Physics M122. Wave phenomena in plasmas described by macroscopic fluid equations. Microwave propagation, plasma oscillations, ion acoustic waves, cyclotron waves, hydromagnetic waves, drift waves. Rayleigh/Taylor, Kelvin/ Helmholtz, universal, and streaming instabilities. Application to experiments in fully and partially ionized gases. Letter grading.

285B. Advanced Plasma Waves and Instabilities. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M185, and 285A or Physics 222A. Interaction of intense electromagnetic waves with plasmas: waves in inhomogeneous and bounded plasmas, nonlinear wave coupling and damping, parametric instabilities, anomalous resistivity, shock waves, echoes, laser heating. Emphasis on experimental considerations and techniques. Letter grading.

M287. Fusion Plasma Physics and Analysis. (4) (Same as Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M237B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M185. Fundamentals of plasmas at thermonuclear burning conditions. Fokker/ Planck equation and applications to heating by neutral beams, RF, and fusion reaction products. Bremsstrahlung, synchrotron, and atomic radiation processes. Plasma surface interactions. Fluid description of burning plasma. Dynamics, stability, and control. Applications in tokamaks, tandem mirrors, and alternate concepts. Letter grading.

295. Academic Technical Writing for Electrical Engineers. (3) Seminar, three hours. Designed for electrical engineering Ph.D. students who have completed preliminary examinations. Students read models of good writing and learn to make rhetorical observations and writing decisions, improve their academic and technical writing skills by writing and revising conference and journal papers, and practice writing for and speaking to various audiences, including potential students, engineers outside their specific fields, and nonengineers (colleagues outside field, policymakers, etc.). Students write in variety of genres, all related to their professional development as electrical engineers. Emphasis on writing as vital way to communicate precise technical and professional information in distinct contexts, directly resulting in specific outcomes. S/U grading.

296. Seminar: Research Topics in Electrical Engineering. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, four hours. Advanced study and analysis of current topics in electrical engineering. Discussion of current research and literature in research specialty of faculty member teaching course. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

297. Seminar Series: Electrical Engineering. (1) Seminar, 90 minutes; outside study, 90 minutes. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Weekly seminars and discussion by invited speakers on research topics of heightened interest. S/U grading.

298. Seminar: Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Seminars may be organized in advanced

technical fields. If appropriate, field trips may be arranged. May be repeated with topic change. S/U or letter grading.

299. M.S. Project Seminar. (4) Seminar, to be arranged. Required of all M.S. students not in thesis option. Supervised research in small groups or individually under guidance of faculty mentor. Regular meetings, culminating report, and presentation required. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Office of Graduate Student Affairs. S/U grading.

375. Teaching Apprentice Practicum. (1 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Preparation: apprentice personnel employment as teaching assistant, associate, or fellow. Teaching apprenticeship under active guidance and supervision of regular faculty member responsible for curriculum and instruction at UCLA. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

475C. Manufacturing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Modeling and analysis of manufacturing systems. Assembly and transfer lines. Facility layout and design. Group technology and flexible manufacturing systems. Planning and scheduling. Task management, machine setup, and operation sequencing. Manufacturing system models. Manufacturing information systems. Social, economic, environmental, and regulatory issues. Letter grading.

596. Directed Individual or Tutorial Studies. (2 to

8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Petition forms to request enrollment may be obtained from assistant dean, Graduate Studies. Supervised investigation of advanced technical problems. S/U grading.

597A. Preparation for M.S. Comprehensive Examination. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Reading and preparation for M.S. comprehensive examination. S/U grading.

597B. Preparation for Ph.D. Preliminary Examinations. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. S/U grading.

597C. Preparation for Ph.D. Oral Qualifying Examination. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Preparation for oral qualifying examination, including preliminary research on dissertation. S/U grading.

598. Research for and Preparation of M.S. Thesis. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Supervised independent research for M.S. candidates, including thesis prospectus. S/U grading.

599. Research for and Preparation of Ph.D. Dissertation. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Usually taken after students have been advanced to candidacy. S/U grading.