Lower Division Courses

1. Electrical Engineering Physics I. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Mathematics 32A, 32B, Physics 1A, 1B. Introduction to modern physics and electromagnetism with an engineering orientation. Emphasis on mathematical tools necessary to express and solve Maxwell equations. Relation of these concepts to waves propagating in free space, including dielectrics and optical systems. Letter grading.

2. Physics for Electrical Engineers. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 1. Introduction to concepts of modern physics necessary to understand solid-state devices, including elementary quantum theory, Fermi energies, and concepts of electrons in solids. Discussion of electrical properties of semiconductors leading to operation of junction devices. Letter grading.

10. Circuit Analysis I. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 1 or Physics 1C. Corequisite: Mathematics 33A. Introduction to linear circuit analysis. Resistive circuits, Kirchhoff laws, operational ampliﬁers, node and loop analysis, Thevenin and Norton theorem, capacitors and inductors, duality, ﬁrst-order circuits, step response, second-order circuits, natural response, forced response. Letter grading.

M16. Logic Design of Digital Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M51A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: Physics 1C. Introduction to digital systems. Speciﬁcation and implementation of combinational and sequential systems. Standard logic modules and programmable logic arrays. Speciﬁcation and implementation of algorithmic systems: data and control sections. Number systems and arithmetic algorithms. Error control codes for digital information. Letter grading.

Upper Division Courses

100. Electrical and Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 1 or Physics 1C, Mathematics 33A, 33B. Electrical quantities, linear circuit elements, circuit principles, signal waveforms, transient and steady state circuit behavior, semiconductor diodes and transistors, small signal models, and operational ampliﬁers. Letter grading.

101. Engineering Electromagnetics. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 1 or Physics 1C, Mathematics 32A and 32B, or 33A and 33B. Electromagnetic ﬁeld concepts, waves and phasors, transmission lines and Smith chart, transient responses, vector analysis, introduction to Maxwell equations, static and quasi-static electric and magnetic ﬁelds. Letter grading.

102. Systems and Signals. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 1 or Physics 1C, Mathematics 33A, 33B. Elements of differential equations, ﬁrstand second-order equations, variation of parameters method and method of undetermined coefﬁcients, existence and uniqueness. Systems: input/output description, linearity, time-invariance, and causality. Impulse response functions, superposition and convolution integrals. Laplace transforms and system functions. Fourier series and transforms. Frequency responses, responses of systems to periodic signals. Sampling theorem. Letter grading.

103. Applied Numerical Computing. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, 11 hours. Requisites: Civil Engineering 15 or Computer Science 31 or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 20, Mathematics 33A, 33B. Introduction to numerical analysis and computing techniques: root ﬁnding, matrix computations for systems of linear equations, systems of nonlinear equations, numerical methods for ordinary differential equations, least squares, eigenvalue/eigenvector problem, applications to engineering problems. Letter grading.

110. Circuit Analysis II. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 10. Corequisite: course 102. Sinusoidal excitation and phasors, AC steady state analysis, AC steady state power, network functions, poles and zeros, frequency response, mutual inductance, ideal transformer, application of Laplace transforms to circuit analysis. Letter grading.

110L. Circuit Measurements Laboratory. (2) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisite: course 100 or 110. Experiments with basic circuits containing resistors, capacitors, inductors, and opamps. Ohm’s law voltage and current division, Thevenin and Norton equivalent circuits, superposition, transient and steady state analysis, and frequency response principles. Letter grading.

113. Digital Signal Processing. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 102, 110. Relationship between continuous-time and discrete-time signals. Ztransform. Discrete Fourier transform. Fast Fourier transform. Structures for digital ﬁltering. Introduction to digital ﬁlter design techniques. Letter grading.
113D. Digital Signal Processing Design. (4) (Formerly numbered 113L.) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisite: course 113. Realtime implementation of digital signal processing algorithms on digital processor chips. Experiments involving A/D and D/A conversion, aliasing, digital ﬁltering, sinusoidal oscillators, Fourier transforms, and ﬁnite wordlength effects. Course project involving original design and implementation of signal processing systems for communications, speech, audio, or video using DSP chip. Letter grading.

114D. Speech and Image Processing Systems Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 113. Design principles of speech and image processing systems. Speech production, analysis, and modeling in ﬁrst half of course; design techniques for image enhancement, ﬁltering, and transformation in second half. Lectures supplemented by laboratory implementation of speech and image processing tasks. Letter grading.

115A. Analog Electronic Circuits I. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 110. Review of physics and operation of diodes and bipolar and MOS transistors. Equivalent circuits and models of semiconductor devices. Analysis and design of single-stage ampliﬁers. DC biasing circuits. Small-signal analysis. Operational ampliﬁer systems. Letter grading.

115AL. Analog Electronics Laboratory I. (2) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisites: courses 110L, 115A. Experimental determination of device characteristics, resistive diode circuits, single-stage ampliﬁers, compound transistor stages, effect of feedback on single-stage ampliﬁers. Letter grading.

115B. Analog Electronic Circuits II. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 115A. Analysis and design of differential ampliﬁers in bipolar and CMOS technologies. Current mirrors and active loads. Frequency response of ampliﬁers. Feedback and its properties. Stability issues and frequency compensation. Letter grading.

115BL. Analog Electronics Laboratory II. (4) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 115AL, 115B. Experimental and computer studies of multistage, wideband, tuned, and power ampliﬁers, and multiloop feedback ampliﬁers. Introduction to thick ﬁlm hybrid techniques. Construction of ampliﬁer using hybrid thick ﬁlm techniques. Letter grading.

115C. Digital Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: course 115A, Computer Science M51A. Recommended: course 115B. Transistor-level digital circuit analysis and design. Modern logic families (TTL, ECL, NMOS, CMOS), integrated circuit (IC) layout, MSI digital circuits (ﬂipﬂops, registers, counters, PLAs, etc.), computer-aided simulation of digital circuits. Letter grading.

115D. Design Studies in Electronic Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 115B, 115C. Applications of distributed circuits. Operational ampliﬁer applications and limitations. Power ampliﬁers. Feedback and stability. Precision analog circuits. Analysis and design of operational ampliﬁers. Noise in electronic circuits. Design of oscillators, phase-locked loops, and frequency synthesizers. Introduction to design of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters. Letter grading.

116B. VLSI System Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, four hours. Requisites: courses M16, 115C, and 113L or M116D. Familiarity with digital circuit, logic design, and computer architecture assumed. VLSI design from a systems perspective, with focus on (1) core VLSI architecture concepts such as datapath design, clocking, power, speed, area tradeoff, input/output, packaging, etc. and (2) behavioral, register-transfer, logic, and physical-level structured VLSI design using CAD tools and hardware description languages such as VHDL. Letter grading.

M116C. Computer Systems Architecture. (4) (Same as Computer Science M151B.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisites: course M16 or Computer Science M51A, Computer Science 33. Recommended: course M116L or Computer Science M152A, Computer Science 111. Computer system organization and design, implementation of CPU datapath and control, instruction set design, memory hierarchy (caches, main memory, virtual memory) organization and management, input/output subsystems (bus structures, interrupts, DMA), performance evaluation, pipelined processors. Letter grading.

M116D. Digital Design Project Laboratory. (4) (Same as Computer Science M152B.) Laboratory, four hours; discussion, two hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course M116C or Computer Science M151B. Design and implementation of complex digital subsystems using ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (e.g., processors, special-purpose processors, device controllers, and input/output interfaces). Students work in teams to develop and implement designs and to document and give oral presentations of their work. Letter grading.

M116L. Introductory Digital Design Laboratory. (2) (Same as Computer Science M152A.) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, two hours. Requisite: course M16 or Computer Science M51A. Hands-on design, implementation, and debugging of digital logic circuits, use of computer-aided design tools for schematic capture and simulation, implementation of complex circuits using programmed array logic, design projects. Letter grading.

121B. Principles of Semiconductor Device Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Introduction to principles of operation of bipolar and MOS transistors, equivalent circuits, high-frequency behavior, voltage limitations. Letter grading.

122AL. Semiconductor Devices Laboratory. (5) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 2, 121B (may be taken concurrently). Design fabrication and characterization of p-n junction and transistors. Students perform various processing tasks such as wafer preparation, oxidation, diffusion, metallization, and photolithography. Letter grading.

123A. Fundamentals of Solid-State I. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 2 or Physics 1C. Limited to junior/senior engineering majors. Fundamentals of solid-state, introduction to quantum mechanics and quantum statistics applied to solid-state. Crystal structure, energy levels in solids, and band theory and semiconductor properties. Letter grading.

123B. Fundamentals of Solid-State II. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisite: course 123A. Discussion of solid-state properties, lattice vibrations, thermal properties, dielectric, magnetic, and superconducting properties. Letter grading.

124. Semiconductor Physical Electronics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 123A. Band structure of semiconductors, experimental probes of basic band structure parameters, statistics of carriers, carrier transport properties at low ﬁelds, excess carrier transport properties, carrier recombination mechanisms, heterojunction properties. Letter grading.

129D. Semiconductor Processing and Device Design. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, six hours. Requisite: course 121B. Introduction to CAD tools used in integrated circuit processing and device design. Device structure optimization tool is based on PISCES; process integration tool is based on SUPREM. Course familiarizes students with the tools. Using CAD tools, a CMOS process integration to be designed. Letter grading.

131A. Probability. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, 10 hours. Requisites: course 102, Mathematics 32B, 33B. Introduction to basic concepts of probability, including random variables and vectors, distributions and densities, moments, characteristic functions, and limit theorems. Applications to communication, control, and signal processing. Introduction to computer simulation and generation of random events. Letter grading.

131B. Introduction to Stochastic Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131A. Introduction to concepts of stochastic processes, emphasizing continuous- and discrete-time stationary processes, correlation function and spectral density, linear transformation, and mean-square estimation. Applications to communication, control, and signal processing. Introduction to computer simulation and analysis of stochastic processes. Letter grading.

132A. Introduction to Communication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: courses 102, 131A. Properties of signals and noise. Baseband pulse and digital signaling. Bandpass signaling techniques. Communication systems: digital transmission, frequency-division multiplexing and telephone systems, satellite communication systems. Performance of communication systems in presence of noise. Letter grading.

132B. Data Communications and Telecommunication Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Layered communications architectures. Queueing system modeling and analysis. Error control, ﬂow and congestion control. Packet switching, circuit switching, and routing. Network performance analysis and design. Multiple-access communications: TDMA, FDMA, polling, random access. Local, metropolitan, wide area, integrated services networks. Letter grading.

136. Introduction to Engineering Optimization Techniques. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisites: course 103, Mathematics 32A, 33A. Introduction to optimization techniques for engineering and science students. Minimization of unconstrained functions of several variables: steepest descent, Newton/Raphson, conjugate gradient, and quasi-Newton methods. Rates of convergence. Methods for constrained minimization: introduction to linear programming and gradient projection methods. Lagrangian methods. Students expected to use HSSEASnet computers. Letter grading.

141. Principles of Feedback Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 102. Mathematical modeling of physical control systems in form of differential equations and transfer functions. Design problems, system performance indices of feedback control systems via classical techniques, root-locus and frequency-domain methods. Computer-aided solution of design problems from real world. Letter grading.

142. Linear Systems: State-Space Approach. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 102. State-space methods of linear system analysis and synthesis, with application to problems in networks, control, and system modeling. Letter grading.

M150. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M150 and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M180.) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: Chemistry 20A, 20L, Physics 1A, 1B, 1C, 4AL, 4BL. Corequisite: course M150L. Introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students design microfabrication processes capable of achieving desired MEMS device. Letter grading.
150DL. Photonic Sensor Design Laboratory. (4) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to seniors. Multidisciplinary course with lectures and laboratory experiments on optical sensors. Fundamentals of intensity and interference-based transducers, polarimeters, multiplexing and sensor networks, physical and biomedical sensors. Design and implementation of optical gyroscope, computer interfacing, and signal processing. Letter grading.

M150L. Introduction to Micromachining and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Laboratory. (2) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M150L and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M180L.) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, one hour. Corequisite: course M150. Hands-on introduction to micromachining technologies and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) laboratory. Methods of micromachining and how these methods can be used to produce variety of MEMS, including microstructures, microsensors, and microactuators. Students go through process of fabricating MEMS device. Letter grading.

161. Electromagnetic Waves. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 101. Time-varying ﬁelds and Maxwell equations, plane wave propagation and interaction with media, energy ﬂow and Poynting vector, guided waves in waveguides, phase and group velocity, radiation and antennas. Letter grading.

162A. Wireless Communication Links and Antennas. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 161. Basic properties of transmitting and receiving antennas and antenna arrays. Array synthesis. Adaptive arrays. Friis transmission formula, radar equations. Cell-site and mobile antennas, bandwidth budget. Noise in communication systems (transmission lines, antennas, atmospheric, etc.). Cell-site and mobile antennas, cell coverage for signal and trafﬁc, interference, multipath fading, ray bending, and other propagation phenomena. Letter grading.

163A. Introductory Microwave Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 161. Transmission lines description of waveguides, impedance transformers, power dividers, directional couplers, ﬁlters, hybrid junctions, nonreciprocal devices. Letter grading.

163B. Microwave and Millimeter Wave Active Devices. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 121B. MESFET, HEMT, HBT, IMPATT, Gunn, small signal models, noise model, large signal model, loadpull method, parameter extraction technique. Letter grading.

163C. Active Microwave Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: courses 115A, 161. Theory and design of microwave transistor ampliﬁers and oscillators; stability, noise, distortion. Letter grading.

164AL. Microwave Wireless Laboratory I. (2) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, three hours; outside study, three hours. Requisite: course 161. Measurement techniques and instrumentation for active and passive microwave components; cavity resonators, waveguides, wavemeters, slotted lines, directional couplers. Design, fabrication, and characterization of microwave circuits in microstrip and coaxial systems. Letter grading.

164DL. Microwave Wireless Laboratory II. (2) (Formerly numbered 164BL.) Lecture, one hour; laboratory, two hours; outside study, three hours. Requisite: course 161. Microwave integrated circuit design from a wireless system perspective, with focus on (1) use of microwave circuit simulation tools, (2) design of wireless frontend circuits including low noise ampliﬁer, mixer, and power ampliﬁer, (3) knowledge and skills required in wireless integrated circuit characterization and implementation. Letter grading.

M171L. Data Communication Systems Laboratory. (2 to 4) (Same as Computer Science M171L.) Laboratory, four to eight hours; outside study, two to four hours. Recommended preparation: course M116L, Computer Science 171. Limited to seniors. Interpretation of analog-signaling aspects of digital systems and data communications through experience in using contemporary test instruments to generate and display signals in relevant laboratory setups. Use of oscilloscopes, pulse and function generators, baseband spectrum analyzers, desktop computers, terminals, modems, PCs, and workstations in experiments on pulse transmission impairments, waveforms and their spectra, modem and terminal characteristics, and interfaces. Letter grading.

172. Introduction to Lasers and Quantum Electronics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course

101. Physical applications and principles of lasers, Gaussian optics, resonant cavities, atomic radiation, laser oscillation and ampliﬁcation, cw and pulsed lasers. Letter grading.

172L. Laser Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite or corequisite: course 172. Properties of lasers, including saturation, gain, mode structure. Laser applications, including optics, modulation, communication, holography, and interferometry. Letter grading.

173. Photonic Devices. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 101. Introduction to basic principles of photonic devices. Topics include crystal optics, dielectric optical waveguides, waveguide couplers, electro-optic devices, magneto-optic devices, acousto-optic devices, second-harmonic generation, optical Kerr effect, optical switching devices. Letter grading.

173DL. Photonics and Communication Design Laboratory. (4) Laboratory, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 102. Recommended: course 132A. Introduction to measurement of basic photonic devices, including LEDs, lasers, detectors, and ampliﬁers; ﬁber-optic fundamentals and measurement of ﬁber systems. Modulation techniques, including A.M., F.M., phase and suppressed carrier methods. Letter grading.

174. Semiconductor Optoelectronics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 172. Introduction to semiconductor optoelectronic devices for optical communications, interconnects, and signal processing. Basic optical properties of semiconductors, pin photodiodes, avalanche photodiode detectors (APD), lightemitting diodes (LED), semiconductor lasers, optical modulators and ampliﬁers, and typical photonic systems. Letter grading.

175. Fourier Optics. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 102, 161. Two-dimensional linear systems and Fourier transforms. Foundation of diffraction theory. Analysis of optical imaging systems. Spatial ﬁltering and optical information processing. Wavefront reconstruction and holography. Letter grading.

176. Lasers in Biomedical Applications. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 101. Study of different types of laser systems and their operation. Examination of their roles in current and projected biomedical applications. Speciﬁc capabilities of laser radiation to be related to each example. Letter grading.

180D. Systems Design. (4) (Formerly numbered 190D.) Lecture, two hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, eight hours. Limited to senior Electrical Engineering majors. Advanced systems design integrating communications, control, and signal processing subsystems. Different project to be assigned yearly in which student teams create high-performance designs that manage trade-offs among subsystems. Letter grading.

M185. Introduction to Plasma Electronics. (4) (Same as Physics M122.) Lecture, three hours. Requisite: course 101 or Physics 110A. Senior-level introductory course on electrodynamics of ionized gases and applications to materials processing, generation of coherent radiation and particle beams, and renewable energy sources. Letter grading.

188. Special Courses in Electrical Engineering. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Special topics in electrical engineering for undergraduate students that are taught on experimental or temporary basis, such as courses taught by resident and visiting faculty members. May be repeated once for credit with topic or instructor change. Letter grading.

194. Research Group Seminars: Electrical Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for undergraduate students who are part of research group. Discussion of research methods and current literature in ﬁeld. Letter grading.

199. Directed Research in Electrical Engineering. (2 to 8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to juniors/seniors. Supervised individual research or investigation under guidance of faculty mentor. Culminating paper or project required. May be repeated for credit with school approval. Individual contract required; enrollment petitions available in Ofﬁce of Academic and Student Affairs. Letter grading.

Graduate Courses

201A. VLSI Architectures and Design Methodologies. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M216A or Computer Science M258A. In-depth study of VLSI architectures and VLSI design methodologies for variety of applications in signal processing, communications, networking, embedded systems, etc. VLSI architectures choices range from ASICs, full custom approach, and special purpose processors to general purpose microprocessors. VLSI design methodologies take design speciﬁcations to implementation with aid of modern computer-aided design tools. Letter grading.

201C. Modeling of VLSI Circuits and Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours. Requisite: course 115C. Detailed study of VLSI circuit and system models considering performance, signal integrity, power and thermal effects, reliability, and manufacturability. Discussion of principles of modeling and optimization codevelopment. Letter grading.

202A. Embedded and Real-Time Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Methodologies and technologies for behavioral synthesis, system synthesis, and real-time issues in embedded systems. Topics include behavioral synthesis, hardware/software codesign, interface synthesis, scheduling, real-time constraints, real-time speciﬁcation and modeling, transformation and estimations during synthesis and design optimization, concurrency, real-time OS, and embedded processors. Design for low power, veriﬁcation, and debugging. Letter grading.

204A. Advanced Compilers. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Computer Science 132, 251A. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Efﬁcient allocating of shared resources (buses, function units, register ﬁles) is one of most important areas of research in modern computer architecture and compilation research. Consideration of instruction selection and scheduling, register assignment, and low-level transformation in context of concurrent microarchitecture (e.g., VLIW, superscalar, and most DSP). Topics include mapping to speciﬁc introprocessor communications buses, making effective use of hardware caches, and targeting special-purpose function units. Letter grading. Electrical Engineering / 289

206A. Mobile and Wireless Networked Computing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Designed for graduate computer science and electrical engineering students. Interdisciplinary course covering mobile computing, wireless networking, and multimedia processing techniques for computing systems capable of ubiquitous transport and processing of multimedia information. Topics include wireless and cellular fundamentals, network mobility management, low-power portable node architecture, mobile IP, wireless TCP, middleware and operating system issues, and context-aware adaptive applications. Letter grading.

208A. Analytical Methods of Engineering I. (4) (Formerly numbered M208A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: Mathematics 131A, 132. Application of abstract mathematical methods to engineering problems. Review of elements of measure and integration, L 2 theory — linear spaces and operators. Eigenvalue problems. Introduction to spectral theory — elementary distribution theory. Applications to problems in engineering. Letter grading.

208B. Analytical Methods of Engineering II. (4) (Formerly numbered M208B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 208A. Application of modern mathematical methods to engineering problems. Review of spectral theory. Green’s functions and eigenvalue problems for second-order ordinary differential equations and their adjoints. Discrete and continuous spectra for ordinary and partial differential equations. Initial and boundary value problems. Letter grading.

208C. Semigroups of Linear Operators and Applications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 208B. Semigroups of linear operators over Hilbert spaces. Generator and resolvent, generation theorems, Laplace inversion formula. Dissipative operators and contraction semigroups. Analytic semigroups and spectral representation. Semigroups with compact resolvents. Parabolic and hyperbolic systems. Controllability and stabilizability. Applications. Letter grading.

209S. Special Topics in Embedded Computing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Current topics in embedded computing systems, including but not limited to processor and system architecture, real-time, low-power design. S/U or letter grading.

210A. Adaptive Filtering. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 113, 131B, Mathematics 115A. Optimal ﬁltering and estimation, Wiener ﬁlters, linear prediction. Steepest descent and stochastic gradient algorithms. Frequency-domain adaptive ﬁlters. Method of least squares, recursive least squares, fast ﬁxed-order and order-recursive (lattice) ﬁlters. Misadjustment, convergence, and tracking analyses, stability issues, ﬁnite precision effects. Connections with Kalman ﬁltering. Nonlinear adaptive ﬁlters. Letter grading.

210B. Optimal Linear Estimation. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 113, 131B, 210A, Mathematics 115A. Uniﬁed treatment of fundamental concepts and basic notions in adaptive ﬁltering, Wiener ﬁltering, Kalman ﬁltering, and H_oo ﬁltering. Emphasis on geometric, equivalence, and duality arguments. Development of array methods and fast algorithms. Discussion of practical issues. Examples of applications from ﬁelds of signal processing, communications, biomedical engineering, ﬁnance, and control. Letter grading.

211A. Digital Image Processing I. (4) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, ﬁve hours. Preparation: computer programming experience. Requisite: course 113. Fundamentals of digital image processing theory and techniques. Topics include two-dimensional linear system theory, image transforms, and enhancement. Concepts covered in lecture applied in computer laboratory assignments. Letter grading.

211B. Digital Image Processing II. (4) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, four hours; outside study, ﬁve hours. Requisite: course 211A. Advanced digital image processing theory and techniques. Topics include modeling, restoration, still-frame and video image compression, tomographic imaging, and multiresolution analysis using wavelet transforms. Letter grading.

212A. Theory and Design of Digital Filters. (4) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 113. Approximation of ﬁlter speciﬁcations. Use of design charts. Structures for recursive digital ﬁlters. FIR ﬁlter design techniques. Comparison of IIR and FIR structures. Implementation of digital ﬁlters. Limit cycles. Overﬂow oscillations. Discrete random signals. Wave digital ﬁlters. Letter grading.

212B. Multirate Systems and Filter Banks. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisite: course 212A. Fundamentals of multirate systems; polyphase representation; multistage implementations; applications of multirate systems; maximally decimated ﬁlter banks; perfect reconstruction systems; paraunitary ﬁlter banks; wavelet transform and its relation to multirate ﬁlter banks. Letter grading.

213A. Advanced Digital Signal Processing Circuit Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: courses 212A, M216A. Digital ﬁlter design and optimization tools, architectures for digital signal processing circuits; integrated circuit modules for digital signal processing; programmable signal processors; CAD tools and cell libraries for application-speciﬁc integrated circuit design; case studies of speech and image processing circuits. Letter grading.

M214A. Digital Speech Processing. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M214A.) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 113. Theory and applications of digital processing of speech signals. Mathematical models of human speech production and perception mechanisms, speech analysis/synthesis. Techniques include linear prediction, ﬁlter-bank models, and homomorphic ﬁltering. Applications to speech synthesis, automatic recognition, and hearing aids. Letter grading.

214B. Advanced Topics in Speech Processing. (4) Lecture, three hours; computer assignments, two hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course M214A. Advanced techniques used in various speech-processing applications, with focus on speech recognition by humans and machine. Physiology and psychoacoustics of human perception. Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) for automatic speech recognition systems, pattern classiﬁcation, and search algorithms. Aids for hearing impaired. Letter grading.

215A. Analog Integrated Circuit Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 115B. Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits. MOS and bipolar device structures and models, single-stage and differential ampliﬁers, noise, feedback, operational ampliﬁers, offset and distortion, sampling devices and discrete-time circuits, bandgap references. Letter grading.

215B. Advanced Digital Integrated Circuits. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: courses 115C, M216A. Analysis and comparison of modern logic families (CMOS, bipolar, BiCMOS, GaAs). MSI digital circuits (ﬂipﬂops, registers, counters, PLAs). VLSI memories (ROM, RAM, CCD, bubble memories, EPROM, EEPROM) and VLSI systems. Letter grading.

215C. Analysis and Design of RF Circuits and Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 215A. Principles of RF circuit and system design, with emphasis on monolithic implementation in VLSI technologies. Basic concepts, communications background, transceiver architectures, low-noise ampliﬁers and mixers, oscillators, frequency synthesizers, power ampliﬁers. Letter grading.

215D. Analog Microsystem Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 215A. Analysis and design of data conversion interfaces and ﬁlters. Sampling circuits and architectures, D/A conversion techniques, A/D converter architectures, building blocks, precision techniques, discrete- and continuous-time ﬁlters. Letter grading.

215E. Signaling and Synchronization. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 215A, M216A. Analysis and design of circuits for synchronization and communication for VLSI systems. Use of both digital and analog design techniques to improve data rate of electronics between functional blocks, chips, and systems. Advanced clocking methodologies, phase-locked loop design for clock generation, and high-performance wire-line transmitters, receivers, and timing recovery circuits. Letter grading.

M216A. Design of VLSI Circuits and Systems. (4) (Same as Computer Science M258A.) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; laboratory, four hours; outside study, three hours. Requisites: courses M16 or Computer Science M51A, and 115A. Recommended: course 115C. LSI/VLSI design and application in computer systems. Fundamental design techniques that can be used to implement complex integrated systems on a chip. Letter grading.

M216B-M216C. LSI in Computer System Design. (4-4) (Same as Computer Science M258B-M258C.) Lecture, four hours; laboratory, four hours. Requisite: course M216A. LSI/VLSI design and application in computer systems. In-depth studies of VLSI architectures and VLSI design tools. In Progress (M216B) and S/U or letter (M216C) grading.

M217. Biomedical Imaging. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M217.) Lecture, three hours; laboratory, two hours; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 114D or 211A. Mathematical principles of medical imaging modalities: X-ray, computed tomography, positron emission tomography, single photon emission computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging. Topics include basic principles of each imaging system, image reconstruction algorithms, system conﬁgurations and their effects on reconstruction algorithms, specialized imaging techniques for speciﬁc applications such as ﬂow imaging. Letter grading.

219A. Special Topics in Circuits and Signal Processing. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Advanced treatment of topics selected from research areas in circuit theory, integrated circuits, or signal processing. Letter grading.

221A. Physics of Semiconductor Devices I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Physical principles and design considerations of junction devices. Letter grading.

221B. Physics of Semiconductor Devices II. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Principles and design considerations of ﬁeld effect devices and charge-coupled devices. Letter grading.

221C. Microwave Semiconductor Devices. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Physical principles and design considerations of microwave solid-state devices: Schottky barrier mixer diodes, IMPATT diodes, transferred electron devices, tunnel diodes, microwave transistors. Letter grading.

222. Integrated Circuits Fabrication Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 2. Principles of integrated circuits fabrication processes. Technological limitations of integrated circuits design. Topics include bulk crystal and epitaxial growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ionimplantation, chemical vapor deposition, dry etching, lithography, and metallization. Introduction of advanced process simulation tools. Letter grading.

223. Solid-State Electronics I. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 124, 270. Energy band theory, electronic band structure of various elementary, compound, and alloy semiconductors, defects in semiconductors. Recombination mechanisms, transport properties. Letter grading. 290 / Electrical Engineering

224. Solid-State Electronics II. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course

223. Techniques to solve Boltzmann transport equation, various scattering mechanisms in semiconductors, high ﬁeld transport properties in semiconductors, Monte Carlo method in transport. Optical properties. Letter grading.

225. Physics of Semiconductor Nanostructures and Devices. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 223. Theoretical methods for circulating electronics and optical properties of semiconductor structures. Quantum size effects and low-dimensional systems. Application to semiconductor nanometer scale devices, including negative resistance diodes, transistors, and detectors. Letter grading.

229. Seminar: Advanced Topics in Solid-State Electronics. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 223, 224. Current research areas, such as radiation effects in semiconductor devices, diffusion in semiconductors, optical and microwave semiconductor devices, nonlinear optics, and electron emission. Letter grading.

229S. Advanced Electrical Engineering Seminar. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Preparation: successful completion of Ph.D. major ﬁeld examination. Seminar on current research topics in solid-state and quantum electronics (Section 1) or in electronic circuit theory and applications (Section 2). Students report on a tutorial topic and on a research topic in their dissertation area. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

230A. Estimation and Detection in Communication and Radar Engineering. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Applications of estimation and detection concepts in communication and radar engineering; random signal and noise characterizations by analytical and simulation methods; mean square (MS) and maximum likelihood (ML) estimations and algorithms; detection under ML, Bayes, and Neyman/Pearson (NP) criteria; signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and error probability evaluations. Letter grading.

230B. Digital Communication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 132A, 230A. Basic concepts of digital communication systems; representation of bandpass waveforms; signal space analysis and optimum receivers in Gaussian noise; comparison of digital modulation methods; synchronization and adaptive equalization; applications to modern communication systems. Letter grading.

230C. Algorithms and Processing in Communication and Radar. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230A. Concepts and implementations of digital signal processing algorithms in communication and radar systems. Optimum dynamic range scaling for random data. Algorithms for fast convolution and transform. Spectral estimation algorithms. Parallel processing, VLSI algorithms, and systolic arrays. Letter grading.

230D. Signal Processing in Communications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230C. Basic digital signal processing techniques for estimation and detection of signals in communication and radar systems. Optimization of dynamic range, quantization, and state constraints; DFT, convolution, FFT, NTT, Winograd DFT, systolic array; spectral analysis-windowing, AR, and ARMA; system applications. Letter grading.

231A. Information Theory: Channel and Source Coding. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Fundamental limits on compression and transmission of information. Topics include limits and algorithms for lossless data compression, channel capacity, rate versus distortion in lossy compression, and information theory for multiple users. Letter grading.

231E. Channel Coding Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131A. Fundamentals of error control codes and decoding algorithms. Topics include block codes, convolutional codes, trellis codes, and turbo codes. Letter grading.

232A. Stochastic Modeling with Applications to Telecommunication Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, seven hours. Requisite: course 131A. Introduction to stochastic processes as applied to study of telecommunication systems and trafﬁc engineering. Renewal theory; discrete-time Markov chains; continuous-time Markov jump processes. Applications to trafﬁc and queueing analysis of basic telecommunication system models. Letter grading.

232B. Telecommunication Switching and Queueing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232A. Queue modeling and analysis with applications to space-time digital switching systems and to integrated-service telecommunication systems. Fundamentals of trafﬁc engineering and queueing theory. Queue size, waiting time, busy period, blocking, and stochastic process analysis for Markovian and non-Markovian models. Letter grading.

232C. Telecommunication Architecture and Networks. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232B. Analysis and design of integrated-service telecommunication networks and multiple-access procedures. Stochastic analysis of priority-based queueing system models. Queueing networks; network protocol architectures; error control; routing, ﬂow, and access control. Applications to local-area, packet-radio, satellite, and computer communication networks. Letter grading.

232D. Telecommunication Networks and MultipleAccess Communications. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 232B. Performance analysis and design of telecommunication networks and multiple-access communication systems. Topics include architectures, multiplexing and multiple-access, message delays, error/ﬂow control, switching, routing, protocols. Applications to local-area, packet-radio, local-distribution, computer and satellite communication networks. Letter grading.

232E. Graphs and Network Flows. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 136. Solution to analysis and synthesis problems which may be formulated as ﬂow problems in capacity constrained (or cost constrained) networks. Development of tools of network ﬂow theory using graph theoretic methods; application to communication, transportation, and transmission problems. Letter grading.

233A. Wireless Communication Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230B. Discussion of theory of physical layer and medium access design for wireless communications. Topics include wireless signal propagation and channel modeling, information theoretic studies of wireless models, performance analysis, single carrier and spread spectrum modulation for wireless systems, diversity techniques, multiple-access schemes. Letter grading.

233B. Wireless Communications Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 230B. Various aspects of physical layer and medium access design for wireless communications systems. Topics include wireless signal propagation and channel modeling, single carrier and spread spectrum modulation for wireless systems, diversity techniques, multiple-access schemes, transceiver design and effects of nonideal components, hardware partitioning issues. Case study highlights system level trade-offs. Letter grading.

236A. Linear Programming. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Mathematics 115A or equivalent knowledge of linear algebra. Basic graduate course in linear optimization. Geometry of linear programming. Duality. Simplex method. Interior-point methods. Decomposition and large-scale linear programming. Quadratic programming and complementary pivot theory. Engineering applications. Introduction to integer linear programming and computational complexity theory. Letter grading.

236B. Nonlinear Programming. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 236A. Basic graduate course in nonlinear programming. Convex sets and functions. Engineering applications and convex optimization. Lagrange duality, optimality conditions, and theorems of alternatives. Unconstrained minimization methods. Convex optimization methods (interior-point methods, cutting-plane methods, ellipsoid algorithm). Lagrange multiplier methods and sequential quadratic programming. Letter grading.

236C. Optimization Methods for Large-Scale Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 236B. Theory and computational procedures for decomposing large-scale optimization problems: cutting-plane methods, column generation, decomposition algorithms. Techniques for global continuous optimization: branch-and-bound methods, reverse convex programming, bilinear and biconvex optimization, genetic algorithms, simulated annealing. Introduction to combinatorial optimization. Letter grading.

M237. Dynamic Programming. (4) (Formerly numbered 237.) (Same as Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M276.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Recommended requisite: course 232A or 236A or 236B. Introduction to mathematical analysis of sequential decision processes. Finite horizon model in both deterministic and stochastic cases. Finite-state inﬁnite horizon model. Methods of solution. Examples from inventory theory, ﬁnance, optimal control and estimation, Markov decision processes, combinatorial optimization, communications. Letter grading.

239AS. Topics in Communication. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Topics in one or more special aspects of communication systems, such as phase-coherent communication systems, optical channels, time-varying channels, feedback channels, broadcast channels, networks, coding and decoding techniques. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

239BS. Topics in Operations Research. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Treatment of one or more selected topics from areas such as integer programming; combinatorial optimization; network synthesis; scheduling, routing, location, and design problems; implementation considerations for mathematical programming algorithms; stochastic programming; applications in engineering, computer science, economics. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

M240A. Linear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 141 or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 171A. State-space description of linear time-invariant (LTI) and time-varying (LTV) systems in continuous and discrete time. Linear algebra concepts such as eigenvalues and eigenvectors, singular values, Cayley/Hamilton theorem, Jordan form; solution of state equations; stability, controllability, observability, realizability, and minimality. Stabilization design via state feedback and observers; separation principle. Connections with transfer function techniques. Letter grading.

240B. Linear Optimal Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 141, M240A. Introduction to optimal control, with emphasis on detailed study of LQR, or linear regulators with quadratic cost criteria. Relationships to classical control system design. Letter grading. Electrical Engineering / 291

M240C. Optimal Control. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M280C and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270C.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 240B. Applications of variational methods, Pontryagin maximum principle, Hamilton/Jacobi/Bellman equation (dynamic programming) to optimal control of dynamic systems modeled by nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Letter grading.

241A. Stochastic Processes. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 131B. Random process models: basic concepts, properties. Stationary random processes: covariance and spectrum. Response of linear systems to random inputs: discrete-time and continuous-time models. Time averages and ergodic principle. Sampling principle and interpolation. Simulation of random processes. Letter grading.

241B. Kalman Filtering. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M240A, 241A. Review of state-space theory: Kalman signal generation model. Statistical estimation theory: maximum likelihood principle, optimum mean square estimation, conditional expectation, Wiener/Hopg equation, Gaussian signals and Grad/Schmidt orthogonalization, factorization, maximum unconditional likelihood. Kalman ﬁlter: basic theory, error propagation/steady state convergence theory, examples, applications to system parameter identiﬁcation, Kalman ﬁltering software. Kalman smoother algorithm. Nonlinear extensions, likelihood ratios for Gaussian signal. Letter grading.

241C. Stochastic Control. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 240B, 241B. Linear quadratic Gaussian theory of optimal feedback control of stochastic systems; discrete-time state-space models; sigma algebra equivalence and separation principle; dynamic programming; compensator design for time invariant systems; feedforward control and servomechanisms, extensions to nonlinear systems; applications to interception guidance, gust alleviation. Letter grading.

M242A. Nonlinear Dynamic Systems. (4) (Same as Chemical Engineering M282A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M272A.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M240A or Chemical Engineering M280A or Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M270A. State-space techniques for studying solutions of time-invariant and time-varying nonlinear dynamic systems with emphasis on stability. Liapunov theory (including converse theorems), invariance, center manifold theorem, input-to-state stability and small-gain theorem. Letter grading.

243. Robust and Optimal Control by Convex Methods. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M240A. Multivariable robust control, including H2 and H-inﬁnity optimal control and robust performance analysis and synthesis against structured uncertainty. Emphasis on convex methods for analysis and design, in particular linear matrix inequality (LMI) approach to control. Letter grading.

M248S. Seminar: Systems, Dynamics, and Control Topics. (2) (Same as Chemical Engineering M297 and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M299A.) Seminar, two hours; outside study, six hours. Limited to graduate engineering students. Presentations of research topics by leading academic researchers from ﬁelds of systems, dynamics, and control. Students who work in these ﬁelds present their papers and results. S/U grading.

249S. Topics in Control. (4) Seminar, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Thorough treatment of one or more aspects of control theory and applications, such as computational methods for optimal control; stability of distributed systems; identiﬁcation; adaptive control; nonlinear ﬁltering; differential games; applications to ﬂight control, nuclear reactors, process control, biomedical problems. May be repeated for credit with topic change. Letter grading.

M250A. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Fabrication. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M250A and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M280.) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M150L. Advanced discussion of micromachining processes used to construct MEMS. Coverage of many lithographic, deposition, and etching processes, as well as their combination in process integration. Materials issues such as chemical resistance, corrosion, mechanical properties, and residual/intrinsic stress. Letter grading.

M250B. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Device Physics and Design. (4) (Same as Biomedical Engineering M250B and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M282.) Lecture, three hours; discussion, one hour; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M250A. Introduction to MEMS design. Design methods, design rules, sensing and actuation mechanisms, microsensors, and microactuators. Designing MEMS to be produced with both foundry and nonfoundry processes. Computer-aided design for MEMS. Design project required. Letter grading.

259S. Seminar: Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS). (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, four hours. Seminar on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Letter grading.

260A-260B. Advanced Engineering Electrodynamics. (4-4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 161, 162A. Advanced treatment of concepts in electrodynamics and their applications to modern engineering problems. Waves in anisotropic, inhomogeneous, and dispersive media. Guided waves in bounded and unbounded regions. Radiation and diffraction, including optical phenomena. Partially coherent waves, statistical media. Letter grading.

261. Microwave and Millimeter Wave Circuits. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 163A. Rectangular and circular waveguides, microstrip, stripline, ﬁnline, and dielectric waveguide distributed circuits, with applications in microwave and millimeter wave integrated circuits. Substrate materials, surface wave phenomena. Analytical methods for discontinuity effects. Design of passive microwave and millimeter wave circuits. Letter grading.

262. Antenna Theory and Design. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 162A. Antenna patterns. Sum and difference patterns. Optimum designs for rectangular and circular apertures. Arbitrary side lobe topography. Discrete arrays. Mutual coupling. Design of feeding networks. Letter grading.

263. Reﬂector Antennas Synthesis, Analysis, and Measurement. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 260A, 260B. Reﬂector pattern analysis techniques. Single and multireﬂector antenna conﬁgurations. Reﬂector synthesis techniques. Reﬂector feeds. Reﬂector tolerance studies, including systematic and random errors. Arrayfed reﬂector antennas. Near-ﬁeld measurement techniques. Compact range concepts. Microwave diagnostic techniques. Modern satellite and ground antenna applications. Letter grading.

266. Computational Methods for Electromagnetics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 162A, 163A. Computational techniques for partial differential and integral equations: ﬁnite-difference, ﬁnite-element, method of moments. Applications include transmission lines, resonators, integrated circuits, solid-state device modeling, electromagnetic scattering, and antennas. Letter grading.

270. Applied Quantum Mechanics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Preparation: modern physics (or course 123A), linear algebra, and ordinary differential equations courses. Principles of quantum mechanics for applications in lasers, solid-state physics, and nonlinear optics. Topics include eigenfunction expansions, observables, Schrödinger equation, uncertainty principle, central force problems, Hilbert spaces, WKB approximation, matrix mechanics, density matrix formalism, and radiation theory. Letter grading.

271. Classical Laser Theory. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 172. Microscopic and macroscopic laser phenomena and propagation of optical pulses using classical formalism. Letter grading.

272. Dynamics of Lasers. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course 271. Ultrashort laser pulse characteristics, generation, and measurement. Gain switching, Q switching, cavity dumping, active and passive mode locking. Pulse compression and soliton pulse formation. Nonlinear pulse generation: soliton laser, additive-pulse mode locking, and parametric oscillators. Pulse measurement techniques. Letter grading.

273. Nonlinear Optics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 172, 270. Nonlinear optical susceptibilities. Coupled-wave formulation. Crystal optics, electro-optics, and magnetooptics. Sum- and difference-frequency generation. Harmonic and parametric generation. Stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering. Four-wave mixing and phase conjugation. Field-induced index changes and self-phase modulation. Letter grading.

274. Fiber Optic System Design. (4) Lecture, three hours; outside study, nine hours. Requisites: courses 173DL and/or 174. Top-down introduction to physical layer design in ﬁber optic communication systems, including Telecom, Datacom, and CATV. Fundamentals of digital and analog optical communication systems, ﬁber transmission characteristics, and optical modulation techniques, including direct and external modulation and computer-aided design. Architectural-level design of ﬁber optic transceiver circuits, including preampliﬁer, quantizer, clock and data recovery, laser driver, and predistortion circuits. Letter grading.

279S. Special Topics in Quantum Electronics. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Current research topics in quantum electronics, lasers, nonlinear optics, optoelectronics, ultrafast phenomena, ﬁber optics, and lightwave technology. May be repeated for credit. Letter grading.

285A. Plasma Waves and Instabilities. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses 101, and M185 or Physics M122. Wave phenomena in plasmas described by macroscopic ﬂuid equations. Microwave propagation, plasma oscillations, ion acoustic waves, cyclotron waves, hydromagnetic waves, drift waves. Rayleigh/Taylor, Kelvin/ Helmholtz, universal, and streaming instabilities. Application to experiments in fully and partially ionized gases. Letter grading.

285B. Advanced Plasma Waves and Instabilities. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisites: courses M185, and 285A or Physics 222A. Interaction of intense electromagnetic waves with plasmas: waves in inhomogeneous and bounded plasmas, nonlinear wave coupling and damping, parametric instabilities, anomalous resistivity, shock waves, echoes, laser heating. Emphasis on experimental considerations and techniques. Letter grading.

M287. Fusion Plasma Physics and Analysis. (4) (Same as Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering M237B.) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: course M185. Fundamentals of plasmas at thermonuclear burning conditions. Fokker/ Planck equation and applications to heating by neutral beams, RF, and fusion reaction products. Bremsstrahlung, synchrotron, and atomic radiation processes. Plasma surface interactions. Fluid description of burning plasma. Dynamics, stability, and control. Applications in tokamaks, tandem mirrors, and alternate concepts. Letter grading. 292 / Engineering Schoolwide Programs

296. Seminar: Research Topics in Electrical Engineering. (2) Seminar, two hours; outside study, four hours. Advanced study and analysis of current topics in electrical engineering. Discussion of current research and literature in research specialty of faculty member teaching course. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

298. Seminar: Engineering. (2 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Seminars may be organized in advanced technical ﬁelds. If appropriate, ﬁeld trips may be arranged. May be repeated with topic change. Letter grading.

375. Teaching Apprentice Practicum. (1 to 4) Seminar, to be arranged. Preparation: apprentice personnel employment as teaching assistant, associate, or fellow. Teaching apprenticeship under active guidance and supervision of regular faculty member responsible for curriculum and instruction at the University. May be repeated for credit. S/U grading.

475C. Manufacturing Systems. (4) Lecture, four hours; outside study, eight hours. Requisite: Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 475B. Modeling and analysis of manufacturing systems. Assembly and transfer lines. Facility layout and design. Group technology and ﬂexible manufacturing systems. Planning and scheduling. Task management, machine setup, and operation sequencing. Manufacturing system models. Manufacturing information systems. Social, economic, environmental, and regulatory issues. Letter grading.

596. Directed Individual or Tutorial Studies. (2 to

8) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Petition forms to request enrollment may be obtained from assistant dean, Graduate Studies. Supervised investigation of advanced technical problems. S/U grading.

597A. Preparation for M.S. Comprehensive Examination. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Reading and preparation for M.S. comprehensive examination. S/U grading.

597B. Preparation for Ph.D. Preliminary Examinations. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. S/U grading.

597C. Preparation for Ph.D. Oral Qualifying Examination. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Preparation for oral qualifying examination, including preliminary research on dissertation. S/U grading.

598. Research for and Preparation of M.S. Thesis. (2 to 12) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Supervised independent research for M.S. candidates, including thesis prospectus. S/U grading.

599. Research for and Preparation of Ph.D. Dissertation. (2 to 16) Tutorial, to be arranged. Limited to graduate electrical engineering students. Usually taken after students have been advanced to candidacy. S/U grading.