6. Basic Electrical and Electronic Circuits (4) KHAMMASH, SOH
Prerequisites: Physics 3-3L; Mathematics 3C; open to ME majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have completed ECE 2A or 2B, or ECE 6A or 6B.
Introduction to basic electrical circuits and electronics. Includes Kirchhoff’s laws, phasor analysis, circuit elements, operational amplifiers, and transistor circuits.
10. Engineering Graphics: Sketching, CAD, and Conceptual Design
(4) LAGUETTE
Prerequisite: ME majors only.
Introduction to engineering graphics, CAD, and freehand sketching. Develop CAD proficiency using advanced 3-D software. Graphical presentation of design: views, sections, dimensioning, and tolerancing.
11. Introductory Concepts in Mechanical Engineering
(1) BOTHMAN, FIELDS, EVANS, BRUCH, BELTZ Prerequisite: lower-division standing.
The theme question of this course is “What do mechanical engineers do?” Survey of mechanical and environmental engineering applications. Lectures by mechanical engineering faculty and practicing engineers.
12. Manufacturing Processes (1) STAFF
Prerequisite: ME majors only.
Processes used to convert raw material into finished objects. Overview of manufacturing processes including: casting, forging, machining, presswork, plastic and composite processing. Videos, demonstrations, and tours illustrate modern industrial practice. Selection of appropriate processes.
12S. Introduction to Machine Shop (1) BOTHMAN
Prerequisite: ME majors only.
Basic machine shop skills course. Students learn to work safely in a machine shop. Students are introduced to the use of hand tools, the lathe, the milling machine, drill press, saws, and precision measuring tools. Students apply these skills by completing a project.
14. Statics
(4) BELTZ, MILSTEIN, TURNER
Prerequisite: Physics 1 and Mathematics 3B; open to
ME majors only.
Introduction to applied mechanics. Forces, moments, couples, and resultants; vector algebra; construction of free body diagrams; equilibrium in 2- and 3- dimensions; analysis of frames, machines, trusses and beams; distributed forces; friction.
15. Strength of Materials
(4) BELTZ, MILSTEIN, KEDWARD, LAGUETTE
Prerequisites: ME 14; open to mechanical engineering majors only.
Hooke’s law and properties of structural materials. Methods of sections and virtual work and energy methods. Design applications to engineering structures, problems of tension, torsion, flexure and combined loading. Design beyond the elastic limit.
16. Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics
(4) TURNER, MCLEAN, BAMIEH
Prerequisites: Physics 2; ME 14; and, Mathematics 5C; (may be taken concurrently); open to ME majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 163A.
Vectorial kinematics of particles in space, orthogonal coordination systems. Relative and constrained motions of particles. Dynamics of particles and systems of particles, equations of motion, energy and momentum methods. Collisions. Planar kinematics and kinetics of rigid bodies. Energy and momentum methods for analyzing rigid body systems. Moving frames and relative motion.
17. Mathematics of Engineering
(3) MOEHLIS, MCLEAN, HOMSY, GIBOU
Prerequisite: Engineering 3; Mathematics 5B (may be taken concurrently); open to ME majors only.
Introduction to basic numerical and analytical methods, with implementation using MATLAB. Topics include root finding, linear algebraic equations, introduction to matrix algebra, determinants, inverses and eigenvalues, curve fitting and interpolation, and numerical differentiation and integration. (S, M)
95. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering
(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 6 units.
Participation in projects in the laboratory or machine shop. Projects may be student- or faculty- originated depending upon student interest and consent of faculty member.
97. Mechanical Engineering Design Projects
(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
May be repeated for maximum of 12 units, variable hours.
Course offers students opportunity to work on established departmental design projects. P/ NP grading, does not satisfy technical elective requirement.
99. Introduction to Research (1-3) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
May be repeated for maximum of 6 units, variable hours.
Directed study to be arranged with individual faculty members. Course offers exceptional students an opportunity to participate in a research group.
Upper Division
100. Professional Seminar
(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: undergraduate standing.
May be repeated for up to 3 units. May not be used as a departmental elective.
A series of weekly lectures given by university staff and outside experts in all fields of mechanical and environmental engineering.
104. Sensors, Actuators and Computer Interfacing
(3) BAMIEH, PADEN
Prerequisites: ME 6; open to ME majors only.
Interfacing of mechanical and electrical systems and mechatronics. Basic introduction to sensors, actuators and computer interfacing and control.
COLLEgE OF ENgINEERINg: mEChANICAL ENgINEERINg • 105
106 • COLLEgE OF ENgINEERINg: mEChANICAL ENgINEERINg
Transducers and measurement devices, actuators, A/D and D/A conversion, signal conditioning and filtering. Practical skills developed in weekly lab exercises.
105. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory (4) BENNETT, MATTHYS
Prerequisite: ME 151B, 152B, 163; and, Materials 101 or 100B.
Introduction to fundamental engineering laboratory measurement techniques and report writing skills. Experiments from thermosciences, fluid mechanics, mechanics, materials science and environmental engineering. Introduction to modern data acquisition and analysis techniques. (S)
106A. Advanced Mechanical Engineering Laboratory
(3) KHAMMASH, BAMIEH
Prerequisite: ME 155A.
An advanced lab course with experiments in dynamical systems and feedback control design. Students design, troubleshoot, and perform detailed, multi-session experiments.
106B. Mechanics, Materials and Structures Laboratory
(3) ZOK, EVANS
Prerequisites: ME 15; ME 154; ME 156A; and Materials 100B or 101.
Experiments on mechanical behavior of materials and structures. Assessment of analytical and finite element methods for mechanical design, with applications to optimization of lightweight structures.
106C. Advanced Thermo/Fluids Laboratory (3) BENNETT, MCLEAN
Prerequisite: ME 105 and 151A-B, ME 151C (may be concurrent) and ME 152A-B
Perform thermo/fluid experiments that emphasize elements of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics. This laboratory course stresses critical thinking skills required to construct and perform experiments independently, and to investigate physical phenomena experimentally.
110. Aerodynamics and Aeronautical Engineering
(3) BELTZ, MEINHART
Prerequisites: ME 14 and 152A.
Concepts from aerodynamics, including lift and drag analysis for airfoils as well as aircraft sizing/scaling issues. Structural mechanics concepts are applied
to practical aircraft design. Intended for students considering a career in aeronautical engineering.
112. Energy Conversion
(3) MARSCHALL, MATTHYS
Prerequisite: ME 151C and 152; or, Chemical Engineering 110B and 120A.
Overview of energy usage and production from prehistory to present times (technical, environmental, and societal issues). Technical analysis of the
modern means of energy production (fossil, nuclear, hydro, wind, solar, geothermal, biomass, etc.): operating principles, hardware, engineering issues, environmental impact, etc.
114. Water Supply and Pollution Control (3) MCLEAN
Prerequisite: ME 152A or Chemical Engineering 120A.
Water supply and quality requirements for domestic, industrial, agricultural, and recreational uses. Properties of natural surface and groundwaters. Pollutants in surface and groundwaters. Transport and fates of waterborne pollutants. Water and sewage treatment processes. Waste water reclamation. Water quality management in ground and surface water environments.
119. Introduction to Coastal Engineering (3) MCLEAN
Prerequisite: ME 152A.
Quantitative description of waves and tides: refraction, shoaling. Nearshore circulation. Sediment characteristics and transport; equilibrium beach profile; shoreline protection.
124. Advanced Topics in Transport Phenomena/Safety
(3) BANERJEE
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C, or ME 151A-B and ME 152A.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 124.
Hazard identification and assessments, runaway reactions, emergency relief. Plant accidents and safety issues. Dispersion and consequences of releases.
125AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering
(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: Consent of instructor.
May be repeated for credit to a maximum of 12 units provided letter designations are different. Students are advised to consult their faculty advisor before making their course selection.
Individual courses each concentrating on one area in the following subjects: applied mechanics, cad/cam, controls, design, environmental engineering, fluid mechanics, materials science, mechanics of solids and structures, ocean and coastal engineering, robotics, theoretical mechanics, thermal sciences, and recent developments in mechanical engineering.
128. Design of Biomedical Devices
(3) LAGUETTE
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 10, 14, 15, 16, and 153; open to ME majors only.
Introductory course addresses the challenges of biomedical device design, prototyping and testing, material considerations, regulatory requirements, design control, human factors and ethics.
134. Advanced Thermal Science (3) MATTHYS, YUEN, HOMSY
Prerequisite: ME 151C.
This class will address advanced topics in fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and thermodynamics. Topics of interest may include combustion, phase change, experimental techniques, materials processing, manufacturing, engines, HVAC, non-Newtonian fluids, etc.
136. Introduction to Multiphase Flows
(3) THEOFANOUS
Prerequisites: Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C; or, ME 151C and 152A.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 136.
Development from basic concepts and techniques of fluid mechanics and heat transfer, to local behavior in multiphase flows. Key multiphase phenomena, related physics. Extension of local conservation principles to usable formulations in multiphase flows. Modelling approaches. Practical examples.
138. Risk Assessment and Management (3) THEOFANOUS
Prerequisites: ME 151B and 152A, or Chemical Engineering 120A-B-C.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 138.
Conceptual foundations of risk and its utility for decision making. Determinism, statistical inference, and uncertainty. Formulation of safety goals and approaches to risk management. Generalized methodology and tools for assessing risks in the industrial, ecological, and public health context.
140A. Numerical Analysis in Engineering (3) HOMSY, MOEHLIS, GIBOU, MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 17 or Chemical Engineering 132A; open to ME and Chemical Engineering majors only.
Numerical analysis and analytical solutions of problems described by linear and nonlinear differential equations with an emphasis on MATLAB. First and second order differential equations; systems of differential equations; linear algebraic equations, matrices and eigenvalues; boundary value problems; finite differences. (F)
140B. Theoretical Analysis in Mechanical Engineering
(3) BRUCH, MOEHLIS, GIBOU, MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 140A; open to ME and Chemical Engineering majors only.
Analysis of engineering problems formulated in terms of partial differential equations. Solutions of these mathematical models by means of analytical and numerical methods. Physical interpretation of the results.
141A. Introduction to MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) (3) TURNER, PENNATHUR
Prerequisites: ME 104 and 163; or, ECE 130A and 137A; with a minimum grade of C- in both.
Same course as ECE 141A.
Analysis of MEMS actuators and displacement sensors with emphasis on the analysis of capacitor- based sensing and actuation. Analysis and design of operational-amplifier models and circuits for capacitor sensors including feedback concepts. Vibration analysis of MEMS structures including wave equations for ‘string’ and bar structures. MEMS scaling concepts.
141B. MEMS: Semiconductor Processing and Device Characterization with Laboratory
(4) TURNER, PENNATHUR
Prerequisites: ME 141A or ECE 141A; and, Chemistry 1B-BL.
Same course as ECE 141B.
Lectures and laboratory on semiconductor processing for MEMS. Description and analysis of key semiconductor and equipment used for MEMS. Design and fabrication of MEMS capacitor-actuator and accelerometers, includes a description of MEMS characterization tools.
141C. Introduction to Microfluidics and BioMEMS
(3) MEINHART
Prerequisite: ME 141A or ECE 141A; open to ME and EE majors only.
Same course as ECE 141C.
Introduces physical phenomena associated with microscale/nanoscale fluid mechanics, microfluids, and bioMEMS. Analytical methods and numerical simulation tools are used for analysis of microfluids.
151A. Thermosciences 1
(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: Physics 2; ME 14; and, Mathematics 5C.
Basic concepts in thermodynamics, system analysis, energy, thermodynamic laws, and cycles. (F)
151B. Thermosciences 2 (4) STAFF
Prerequisite: ME 151A and 152A.
Introduction to heat transfer processes, steady and unsteady state conduction, multidimensional analysis. Introduction to convective heat transfer. (W)
151C. Thermosciences 3
(3) HOMSY, BENNETT
Prerequisites: ME 151B and 152B; open to ME majors only.
Convective heat transfer, external and internal flow, forced and free convection, phase change, heat exchangers. Introduction to radiative heat transfer.
152A. Fluid Mechanics
(4) HOMSY, MATTHYS, MEINHART Prerequisite: Mathematics 5C and ME 16.
Introduction to the fundamental concepts in fluid mechanics and basic fluid properties. Basic equations of fluid flow. Dimensional analysis and similitude. Hydrodynamics. (F)
152B. Fluid Mechanics
(3) MEINHART, PENNATHUR
Prerequisite: ME 152A; open to ME majors only.
Incompressible viscous flow. Boundary-layer theory. Introductory considerations for one-dimensional compressible flow.
153. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design
(3) BELTZ, TURNER, KEDWARD, LAGUETTE
Prerequisites: ME 10 and 16; open to ME majors only.
Design methods. Creative thinking. Introduction to manufacturing processes, design for manufacturing. Project planning and teamwork. Applications of engineering software. Application of engineering principles to practical problem solving. Codes and standards. Engineering ethics.
154. Design and Analysis of Structures
(3) MCMEEKING, KEDWARD, SHUGAR
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 16; open to ME majors only.
Introductory course in structural analysis and design. The theories of matrix structural analysis
and finite element analysis for the solution of analytical and design problems in structures are emphasized. Lecture material includes structural theory compatibility method, slope deflection method, displacement method and virtual work. Topics include applications to bars, beams, trusses, frames, and solids.

155A. Control System Design
(3) BAMIEH, ASTROM, BULLO
Prerequisite: ME 17; ME 140A (may be taken concurrently); and ME 163.
The discipline of control and its application. Dynamics and feedback. The mathematical models: transfer functions and state space descriptions. Simple control design (PID). Assessment of a control problem, specification, fundamental limitations, codesign of system and control.
155B. Control System Design (3) PADEN
Prerequisite: ME 155A.
Dynamic system modeling using state-space methods, controllability and observability, state-space methods for control design including pole placement, and linear quadratic regulator methods. Observers and observer-based feedback controllers. Sampled-data and digital control. Laboratory exercises using MATLAB for simulation and control design.
156A. Mechanical Engineering Design - I (3) TURNER, LUCAS, EVANS
Prerequisite: ME 151C (may be concurrent), 152B, 153 and 154; and MATRL 101 or 100B; open to ME majors only
The rational selection of engineering materials,
and the utilization of Ashby- charts, stress, strain, strength, and fatigue failure consideration as applied to the design of machine elements. Lectures also support the development of system design concepts using assigned projects and involves the preparation of engineering reports and drawings.
156B. Mechanical Engineering Design II (3) KEDWARD
Prerequisites: ME 156A; open to ME majors only.
Machine elements including gears, bearings, and shafts. Joint design and analysis: bolts, rivets, adhesive bonding and welding. Machine dynamics and fatigue. Design for reliability and safety. Codes and standards. Topics covered are applied in practical design projects.
158. Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing
(3) BOTHMAN
Prerequisites: ME 10 and 156A; open to ME majors only.
Engineering applications using advanced 3-D CAD software for plastic part designs and tooling. Topics include an overview of the design for injection molded plastic parts, material selections and electronic tooling design via CAD and CNC system software. Emphasis is put into final design projects that are designed to be functional, manufacturable, and esthetically pleasing.
162. Introduction to Elasticity (3) MCMEEKING, BELTZ
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 140A.
Equations of equilibrium, compatibility, and boundary conditions. Solutionsof two-dimensional problems in rectangular and polar coordinates. Eigen-solutions for the Wedge and Williams’ solution for cracks. Stress intensity factors. Extension, torsion, and bending. Energy theorems. Introduction to wave propagation in elastic solids.
163. Engineering Mechanics: Vibrations (3) MCMEEKING
Prerequisites: ME 16; open to ME majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 163B.
Topics relating to vibration in mechanical systems; exact and approximate methods of analysis, matrix methods, generalized coordinates and Lagrange’s equations, applications to systems. Basic feedback systems and controlled dynamic behavior.
166. Advanced Strength of Materials (3) TURNER
Prerequisite: ME 15.
Analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate systems using integration, area moment, and energy methods. Beams on elastic foundations, curved beams, stress concentrations, fatigue, and theories of failure for ductile and brittle materials. Photoelasticity and other experimental techniques are covered, as well as methods of interpreting in-service failures.
167. Structural Analysis
(3) YANG
Prerequisites: ME 15 or 165; and ME 140A.
Presents introductory matrix methods for analysis of structures. Topics include review of matrix algebra and linear equations, basic structural theorems including the principle of superposition and energy theorems, truss bar, beam and plane frame elements, and programming techniques to realize these concepts.
169. Nonlinear Phenomena
(4) MEZIC, KHAMMASH
Prerequisites: Physics 105A or ME 163; or upper- division standing in ECE.
Same course as ECE 183 and Physics 106. Not open for credit to students who have completed ME 163C.
An introduction to nonlinear phenomena. Flows and bifurcation in one and two dimensions, chaos, fractals, strange attractors. Applications to physics, engineering, chemistry, and biology.
170A. Introduction to Robotics: Robot Mechanics
(4) PADEN, BULLO
Same course as ECE 181A. Recommended preparation: ME 16.
Overview of robot kinematics and dynamics. Structure and operation of industrial robots. Robot performance: workspace, velocity, precision, payload. Comparative discussion of robot mechanical designs. Actuators. Robot coordinate systems. Kinematics of position. Dynamics of manipulators.
170C. Introduction to Robotics: Robot Control
(4) PADEN
Prerequisites: ECE 2A-B-C with a minimum grade of C-; or ME 104.
Same course as ECE 181C.
Overview of robot control technology from open- loop manipulators and sensing systems, to single-joint servovalves and servomotors, to integrated adaptive force and position control using feedback from machine vision and touch sensing systems. Design emphasis on accurate tracking accomplished with minimal algorithm complexity.
173. Control Systems Synthesis (3) BAMIEH
Prerequisite: ME 155A.
Not open for credit to students who have completed ECE 147A.
Pole-placement, observer design, observer- based compensation, frequency and time-domain techniques, internal model principle, linear quadratic regulators, modeling uncertainty in signals and systems, robust stability and performance, synthesis for robustness.
185. Materials in Engineering (3) LEVI, ODETTE
Prerequisite: Materials 100B or 101.
Same course as Materials 185.
Introduces the student to the main families of materials and the principles behind their development, selection, and behavior. Discusses the generic properties of metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites more relevant to structural applications. The relationship of properties to structure and processing is emphasized in every case.
186. Manufacturing and Materials
(3) LEVI, ODETTE
Prerequisites: ME 15 and 151C; and, Materials 100B or 101.
Same course as Materials 186.
Introduction to the fundamentals of common manufacturing processes and their interplay with
the structure and properties of materials as they are transformed into products. Emphasis on process understanding and the key physical concepts and basic mathematical relationships involved in each of the processes discussed.
189A-B-C. Capstone Mechanical Engineering Design Project
(2-2-2) LAGUETTE
Prerequisites: ME 153; and ME 156A (may be taken concurrently).
A three-quarter sequence with grades issued for each quarter. Students may not concurrently enroll in ME 197 and ME 189A-B-C with the same design project.
Students work in teams under the direction of a faculty advisor to tackle an engineering design project. Engineering communication, such as reports and
oral presentations are covered. Course emphasizes practical, hands-on experience, and integrates analytical and design skills acquired in the companion ME 156 courses.
193. Internship in Industry
(1) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor and prior departmental approval needed.
Cannot be used as a departmental elective. May be repeated to a maximum of 2 units.
Students obtain credit for a mechanical engineering related internship and/or industrial experience under faculty supervision. A 6-10 page written report is required for credit.
197. Independent Projects in Mechanical Engineering Design
(1-4) STAFF
Prerequisites: ME 16; consent of instructor.
May be repeated for a maximum of 12 units, variable hours. No more than 4 units may be used as departmental electives.
Special projects in design engineering. Course offers motivated students opportunity to synthesize academic skills by designing and building new machines.
199. Independent Studies in Mechanical Engineering
(1-5) STAFF
Prerequisites: consent of instructor; upper-division standing; completion of two upper-division courses in Mechanical Engineering.
Students must have a minimum of 3.0 grade- point average for the preceding three quarters and are limited to 5 units per quarter and 30 units total in all 98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined. No more than 4 units may be used as departmental electives. May be repeated to 12 units.
Directed individual study.
GraDUate CoUrses
200. Professional Seminar (1) MCMEEKING, MILSTEIN, ODETTE Prerequisite: graduate standing.
A series of weekly lectures given by university staff and outside experts in all fields of mechanical and environmental engineering.
200P. Master of Science Project (3) STAFF
Prerequisite: graduate standing.
A ten-week research project on an advanced topic in Mechanical Engineering.
201. Advanced Dynamics (3) MEZIC
Newton’s laws and symmetries, Newton, Laplace and principle of determinism, qualitative analysis
of Newton’s equations of motion, Hamiltonian mechanics, one degree of freedom (DOF) systems, two DOF systems, motion in central fields, application to molecular dynamics, control of classical dynamical systems, Lagrangian mechanics, chaos and ergodic theory, rigid body motion.
202. Advanced Dynamics
(3) MEZIC
Prerequisite: ME 201; graduate standing.
Differentiable manifolds in dynamical systems theory, differential forms, Hamiltonian phase flow, Lie algebras of vector fields, canonical formalism, integrable systems, introduction to perturbation theory, averaging, chaos in Hamiltonian systems, theory of invariant measures in dynamical systems, ergodic partition, dissipative dynamical systems, limit cycles, Lyapunov exponents, strange attractors.
203. Special Topics in Dynamical Systems (3) MEZIC
Prerequisite: ME 201.
Geometric mechanics, volume-preserving dynamical systems, molecular dynamics; Infinite dimensional dynamics and finite dimensional approximations including incompressible Euler equations and point vortex theory, transport and
COLLEgE OF ENgINEERINg: mEChANICAL ENgINEERINg • 107

108 • COLLEgE OF ENgINEERINg: mEChANICAL ENgINEERINg
fluid mixing, control of measure-preserving systems, equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics methods for vortex gases.
207. Faculty Research Seminar (1) BULLO
A series of bi-weekly presentations given by ladder faculty members to familiarize graduate students with current department research projects. This course is required to be taken by all graduate students within the first year of arrival.
210A. Matrix Analysis and Computation (4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211A, ECE 210A, Mathematics 206A, Chemical Engineering 211A, and Geology 251A. Students should be proficient in basic numerical methods, linear algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some programming language.
Graduate level-matrix theory with introduction to matrix computations. SVD’s, pseudoinverses, variational characterization of eigenvalues, perturbation theory, direct and iterative methods for matrix computations.
210B. Numerical Simulation (4) PETZOLD
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211B, ECE 210B, Mathematics 206B, and Chemical Engineering 211B and Geology 251B. Students should be proficient in basic numerical methods, linear algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some programming language.
Linear multistep methods and Runge-Kutta methods for ordinary differential equations: stability, order and convergence. Stiffness. Differential algebraic equations. Numerical solution of boundary value problems.
210C. Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations—Finite Difference Methods
(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211C, ECE
210C, Mathematics 206C, Chemical Engineering 211C, and Geolgy 251C. Students should be proficient in basic numerical methods, linear algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some programming language.
Finite difference methods for hyperbolic, parabolic and elliptic PDEs, with application to problems in science and engineering. Convergence, consistency, order and stability of finite difference methods. Dissipation and dispersion. Finite volume methods. Software design and adaptivity.
210D. Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations—Finite Element Methods
(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211D, ECE
210D, Mathematics 206D, Chemical Engineering 211D, and Geology 251D. Students should be proficient in basic numerical methods, linear algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some programming language.
Weighted residual and finite element methods
for the solution of hyperbolic, parabolic and elliptical partial differential equations, with application to problems in science and engineering. Error estimates. Standard and discontinuous Galerkin methods.
212. Risk Assessment and Management (3) THEOFANOUS
Prerequisites: consent of instructor.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 212
Conceptual foundations of risk and its utility for decision making. Determinism, statistical inference, and uncertainty. Formulation of safety goals and approaches to risk management. Generalized methodology and tools for assessing risks in the industrial, ecological, and public health context.
215A. Applied Dynamical Systems I (3) MOEHLIS
Prerequisite: graduate standing.
Phase-plane methods, non-linear oscillators,
stability of fixed pints and periodic orbits, invariant manifolds, structural stability, normal form theory, local bifurcations for vector fields and maps, applications from engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology.
215B. Applied Dynamical Systems II (3) MOEHLIS
Prerequisites: ME 215A; graduate standing.
Local codimension two bifurcations, global bifurcations, chaos for vector fields and maps, Smale horseshoe, symbolic dynamics, strange attractors, universality, bifyrcation with symmetry, perturbation theory and averaging, Melnikov’s methods, canards, applications from engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology.
216. Level Set Methods
(4) GIBOU
Prerequisite: Computer Science 211C, or Chemical Engineering 211C, or ECE 210C, or ME 210C.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 226, ECE 226, and Computer Science 216.
Mathematical description of the level set method and design of the numerical methods used in its implementations (ENO-WENO, Godunov, Lax-Friedrich, etc.). Introduction to the Ghost Fluid Method. Applications in CFD, Materials Sciences, Computer Vision and Computer Graphics.
218. Introduction to Multiphase Flows (3) THEOFANOUS
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 218.
Development from basic concepts and techniques of fluid mechanics and heat transfer, to local behavior in multiphase flows. Key multiphase phenomena, related physics. Extension of local conservation principles to usable formulations in multiphase flows. Modelling approaches. Practical examples. Computer simulations.
219. Mechanics of Materials (3) MCMEEKING
Same course as Materials 207.
Matrices and tensors, stress deformation and flow, compatibility conditions, constitutive equations, field equations and boundary conditions in fluids and solids, applications in solid and fluid mechanics.
220A-B. Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics (3-3) BENNETT, HOMSY, MEINHART
Prerequisites: ME 151A-B and 152A-B.
Introductory course in fluid mechanics. Basic equations of motion (continuity, momentum, energy, vorticity), coordinate transformations, “potential” flow, thin airfoil theory, conformal mapping, vortex dynamics, boundary layers, stability theory, laminar/ turbulent transition, turbulence. Inviscid/viscid, irrotational/rotational, incompressible/compressible flow examples.
221. Advanced Viscous Flow (3) HOMSY
Prerequisite: ME 220A.
Review the Navier-Stokes equations in velocity, pressure, and vorticity variables. Analyze details of important low and moderate Reynolds number flow applications and then high Reynolds number flows with boundary layer phenomena. Compare exact, approximate, numerical, and experimental solution methods.
223. Turbulent Flow
(3) STAFF
Prerequisites: ME 220A-B or Chemical Engineering 220A-B.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 221.
Nature and origin of turbulence, boundary layer mechanics law of the wall, wakes, and jets, transport of properties, statistical description of turbulence, measurement problems, stratification effects. Application of principles to practical problems is stressed.
225AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering
(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Specialized courses dealing with advanced topics and recent developments in one or more of the following areas: dynamic systems, control and robotics, fluid mechanics, materials science and
engineering, ocean engineering, solid mechanics and structures, thermal sciences.
230. Elasticity and Plasticity (3) MCMEEKING
Prerequisite: ME 219 or MATRL 207
Same course as Materials 230.
Review field equations of elasticity and plasticity. Energy principles and uniqueness theorems. Elementary problems in one and two dimensions, stress functions, and complex variable methods. Plastic stress-strain laws; flow potentials. Torsion and bending of plastic flow, slip line theory.
233A. Design of Composite Structures (3) KEDWARD
Prerequisite: ME 230 or 275A.
Emphasis is placed on the differences of design with composites vis-à-vis the design of conventional metallic structures. The content is directed at the class of polymer-matrix composites.
234A. Structural Dynamics (3) BRUCH
Formulation of the equations of motion for free and forced response of single and multi-degree
of freedom systems and for distributed-parameter systems. Modal analysis. Approximate solution techniques. Numerical algorithms. Damping.
236. Nonlinear Control Systems (4) KOKOTOVIC, TEEL
Same course as ECE 236. Recommended preparation: ECE 230A.
Analysis and design of nonlinear control systems. Focus on Lyapunov stability theory, with sufficient time devoted to contrasts between linear and nonlinear systems, input-output stability and the describing function method.
237. Nonlinear Control Design (4) KOKOTOVIC
Prerequisite: ECE 236 or ME 236.
Same course as ECE 237.
Stabilizability by linearization and by geometric methods. State feedback design and input/output linearization. Observability and output feedback design. Singular perturbations and composite control. Backstepping design of robust controllers for systems with uncertain nonlinearities. Adaptive nonlinear control.
239. Conduction Heat Transfer
(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: undergraduate course in heat transfer.
Development of mathematical representation of conduction heat transfer and techniques available for analytical, analog, and numerical solutions.
240. Convective Heat Transfer
(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: undergraduate course in heat transfer.
Solutions to the momentum, continuity, and energy equations will be considered for both natural and forced convection. Applications to industrial problems, convective transfer in high-speed flows, heat transfer in rarefied flows, and the effects of chemical reactions on convective rates will be included.
241. Radiative Energy Transfer
(3) STAFF
Prerequisite: undergraduate course in heat transfer.
The physical nature of radiation and of its interaction with matter, conservation principles in radiative transfer and their relation to molecular and convective processes, and thermodynamic equilibrium with consideration of nondimensional parameters is considered. Applications to astrophysics, combustion, and plasma technology are discussed.
243A-B. Linear Systems I, II
(4-4) KOKOTOVIC, BAMIEH
Prerequisites: ME 210A (for 243A): ECE 140; and, ECE 230A or ME 243A; and ME 210A.
Same courses as ECE 230A-B.
Internal and external descriptions. Solution of state equations. Controllability and observability realizations. Pole assignment, observers; modern compensator design. Disturbance localization and decoupling. Least- squares control. Least-squares estimation; Kalman filters; smoothing. The separation theorem; LQG compensator design. Computational considerations. Selected additional topics.

244A. Advanced Theoretical Methods in Engineering
(4) FREDRICKSON, CHMELKA, LEAL
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 230A.
Methods of solution of partial differential equations and boundary value problems. Linear vector and function spaces, generalized Fourier analysis, Sturm- Liouville theory, calculus of variations, and conformal mapping techniques.
244B. Advanced Theoretical Methods in Engineering
(3) FREDRICKSON
Prerequisites: ME 244A and consent of instructor.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 230B.
Advanced mathematical methods for engineers and scientists. Complex analysis, integral equations and Green’s functions. Asymptotic analysis of integrals and sums. Boundary layer methods and WKB theory.
250. Advanced Thermodynamics (3) MILSTEIN
Prerequisites: ME 151A-B.
An extended treatment of the fundamentals of classical thermodynamics, including availability and reversibility, the chemical potential, properties of matter, thermochemistry, chemical equilibrium of real gases and gas mixtures.
251. Statistical Thermodynamics (3) MILSTEIN
Prerequisites: ME 151A-B.
An extended treatment of the fundamentals of statistical thermodynamics, equilibrium distributions, properties of gases, liquids, and solids.
252A. Computational Fluid Dynamics (3) MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 210C or Computer Science 211C or ECE 210C or Mathematics 206C or Chemical Engineering 211C.
Numerical simulation of fluid flows. Basic discretization techniques for parabolic, elliptical, and hyperbolic conservation laws. Stability and accuracy. Diffusion equation, linear convection equation.
252B. Computational Fluid Dynamics (3) MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 210C or Computer Science 211C or ECE 210C or Mathematics 206C or Chemical Engineering 211C.
Discussion of appropriate boundary conditions. Nonlinear convection dominated problems, curvilinear coordinates, basics of grid generation. Inviscid flow, boundary layer flow, incompressible Navier-Stokes flows.
252C. Computational Fluid Dynamics (3) MEIBURG
Prerequisites: ME 210C or Computer Science 211C or ECE 210C or Mathematics 206C or Chemical Engineering 211C.
Compressible inviscid flows. Compressible viscous flows. Boundary element methods. Lagrangian and vortex methods.
254. Optimal Control of Dynamic Systems (3) BAMIEH
Prerequisite: ME 243A or ECE 230A or equivalent.
Introduction to the classical calculus of variations. Optimization problems for dynamic systems with terminal and path constraints. Necessary and sufficient conditions. Neighboring extremal paths and the second variation.Singular solutions. Numerical solutions of optimal control problems. Applications to engineering systems.
256. Introductory Robust Control with Applications
(4) SMITH, KHAMMASH
Prerequisites: ECE 230A or ME 255A; and ECE 230B or ME 243B (may be taken concurrently).
Same course as ECE 232.
Robust Control theory; uncertainty modeling; stability of systems in the presence of norm-bounded perturbations; induced norm performance problems; structured singular value analysis; H-infinity control theory; model reduction; computer simulation based design project involving practical problems.
260A. Materials Structures and Bonding (3) MILSTEIN
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Crystal structures (Miller indices, Bravais lattices, symmetry operations). Modeling of atomic bonding, determination and applications of interatomic potentials, atomic basis for elastic moduli. Crystal anisotrophy. Lattice statics and molecular dynamics computations.
262. Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria
(3) ODETTE, CLARKE, ZOK
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Materials 201.
Advanced thermodynamics with emphasis on phase equilibria, properties of solutions, and multicomponent systems.
264. Mechanical Behavior of Materials (3) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Materials 220.
Concepts of stress and strain. Deformation
of metals, polymers, and ceramics. Elasticity, viscoelasticity, plastic flow, and creep. Linear elastic fracture mechanics. Mechanisms of ductile and brittle fracture.
265. Composite Materials (3) ODETTE, CLARKE, ZOK Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Materials 261.
Stress and strain relations in composites. Residual stresses. The fracture resistance of organic and inorganic matrix composites. Statistical aspects of fiber failure. Composite laminates and delamination cracks. Cumulative damage concepts. Interface properties. Design criteria.
271. Finite Element Structural Analysis (3) MCMEEKING
Prerequisite: ME 219.
Same course as Materials 240.
Definitions and basic element operations. Displacement approach in linear elasticity. Element formulation: direct methods and variational methods. Global analysis procedures: assemblage and solution. Plane stress and plane strain. Solids of revolution
and general solids. Isoparametric representation and numerical integration. Computer implementation.
275. Fracture Mechanics (3) ODETTE, MCMEEKING Prerequisite: ME 219.
Same course as Materials 234.
Analytic solutions of a stationary crack under
static loading. Elastic and elastoplastic analysis. The
J integral. Energy balance and crack growth. Criteria for crack initiation and growth. Dynamic crack progagation. Fatigue. The micromechanics of fracture.
285. Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (3) MCLEAN
Prerequisite: ME 152A.
The ocean-atmosphere system. Air-sea interaction. Governing equations for rotating system: conservation of mass, momentum and energy. Ocean surface waves: generation, spectral characteristics. Internal waves. Geostrophic motion. Rotating boundary layers: Ekman dynamics. Tides. Kelvin waves.
291A. Physics of Transducers (3) SOH
Prerequisite: graduate standing.
Recommended preparation: ECE 220A (may be taken concurrently).
The use of concepts in electromagnetic theory and solid state physics to describe capacitive, pierzoresistive, piezoelectric and tunneling transduction mechanisms and analyze their applications in microsystems technology.
292. Design of Transducers
(3) TURNER, PENNATHUR
Prerequisites: ME 291A and ECE 220A; graduate standing.
Design issues associated with microscale transduction. Electrodynamics, linear and nonlinear mechanical behavior, sensing methods, MEMS-specific fabrication design rules, and layout are all covered.
Modeling techniques for electromechanical systems are also discussed.
295. Group Studies: Controls, Dynamical Systems, and Computation
(1) STAFF
Same course as ECE 295, Computer Science 592, and Chemical Engineering 295.
A series of weekly lectures given by university staff and outside experts in the fields of control systems, dynamical systems, and computation.
501. Teaching Assistant Practicum (1-4) STAFF
Normally required of students serving as teaching assistants. No unit credit allowed towards advanced degree.
Practical experience in the various activities associated with teaching, including lecturing, supervision of laboratories and discussion sections, preparation and grading of homework and exams.
503. Research Assistant Practicum (1-4) STAFF
Will not count as unit credit towards M.S. or Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering.
Practical experience in the various activities associated with research, including experimental work, theoretical work and analyses, and assisting department faculty and other professional researchers in their duties.
596. Directed Research (1-12) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Not applicable to course requirement for M.S. and Ph.D. degree. S/U grading.
Experimental or theoretical research undertaken under the direction of a faculty member for graduate students who have not yet advanced to candidacy.
597. Individual Study for Ph.D. Qualifying Examination
(1-12) STAFF
Prerequisite: graduate standing.
No unit credit allowed toward advanced degree. Maximum of 12 units per quarter; enrollment limited to 24 units per examination. Instructor is normally student’s major advisor. S/U grading.
Individual studies for Ph.D. qualifying examination.
598. Master’s Thesis Research and Preparation
(1-12) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of thesis advisor.
No unit credit allowed toward advanced degree.
For research underlying the thesis and writing of the thesis.
599. Ph.D. Dissertation Research and Preparation
(1-12) STAFF
Prerequisite: consent of dissertation advisor.
No unit credit allowed toward advanced degree.
For research and preparation of the dissertation.