Lower Division
1. Ten Puzzling Problems in Computer
Engineering
(1) Parhami
Prerequisite: open to pre-computer engineering only.
Seminar, 1 hour.
Gaining familiarity with, and motivation to study,
the field of computer engineering, through puzzle-like
problems that represent a range of challenges facing
computer engineers in their daily problem-solving
efforts and at the frontiers of research.
2A. Circuits, Devices, and Systems
(5) York
Prerequisites: Mathematics 3A-B-C with a minimum
grade of C; and, Mathematics 5A with a minimum
grade of C (may be taken concurrently); Physics 3 or
23 (may be taken concurrently); open to electrical
engineering, computer engineering, and pre-computer
engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory,
4 hours.
Introduction to basic circuit analysis. KCL, KVL,
nodal analysis, superposition, independent and
dependent sources; diodes and I-V characteristics;
basic op-amp circuits; first-order transient analysis; AC
analysis and phasors. Introduction to the use of test
instruments.
2B. Circuits, Devices, and Systems
(5) York
Prerequisites: ECE 2A with a grade of C- or better;
open to electrical engineering, computer engineering,
and pre-computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3
hours; laboratory, 4 hours.
Second order circuits. Laplace transform and
solution of steady state and transient circuit problems
in the s-domain; Bode plots; Fourier series and
transforms; filters. Transistor as a switch; load lines;
simple logic gates; latches and flip-flops.
2C. Circuits, Devices, and Systems
(5) York
Prerequisites: ECE 2B with a grade of C- or better (may
be taken concurrently); open to electrical engineering,
computer engineering, and pre-computer engineering
majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 4 hours.
Two-port network parameters; small-signal models
of nonlinear devices; transistor amplifier circuits;
frequency response of amplifiers; non-ideal op-amps;
modulation, bandwidth, signals; Fourier analysis.
4. Design Project for Freshmen
(4) Staff
Prerequisites: Mathematics 3A-B-C and Physics 1 with
minimum grades of C; Engineering 3 with a minimum
grade of C-. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
This first course on design gives an intuitive
introduction to engineering design. Learn how to take
an idea of a system and convert it to a working model.
Use hardware and software for building a system.
15A. Fundamentals of Logic Design
(3) Marek-Sadowska
Prerequisites: ECE 2A with a minimum grade of C-;
open to electrical engineering, computer engineering,
and pre-computer engineering majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed ECE 15. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1
hour.
Boolean algebra, logic of propositions, minterm
and maxterm expansions, Karnaugh maps, QuineMcCluskey
methods, melti-level circuits, combinational
circuit design and simulation, multiplexers, decoders,
programmable logic devices.
15B. Computer Organization
(3) staff
Prerequisites: ECE 15A with a minimum grade of C-;
open to electrical engineering, computer engineering,
and pre-computer engineering majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed Computer Science 30 or ECE 15. Lecture, 3
hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Basic memory and processor organization,
instruction set architecture, assembly language
programming, number systems, arithmetic, data
transfer and control flow instructions, procedures,
memory management, program execution.
94AA-ZZ. Group Studies in Electrical and
Computer Engineering
(1-4) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Group studies intended for small number of
advanced students who share an interest in a topic not
included in the regular departmental curriculum.
Upper Division
121A-B. The Practice of Science
(3-4) Hu, Awschalom
Prerequisites: consent of instructor (for 121A): ECE
121A or Physics 121A; consent of instructor (for
121B).
Same course as Physics 121A-B. Lecture, 3 hours
(for 121A): Lecture, 4 hours (for 121B).
Provides experience in pursuing careers within
science and engineering through discussions with
researchers, lectures on ethics, funding, intellectual
property, and commercial innovation. Students prepare
a focused research proposal that is pursued in the
second quarter of the course.
124A. VLSI Principles
(4) Banerjee
Prerequisites: ECE 132 (may be taken concurrently)
and ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C- in both.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Introduction to CMOS digital VLSI design:
CMOS devices and manufacturing technology;
transistor level design of static and dynamic logic
gates and components and interconnections; circuit
characterization: delay, noise margins, and power
dissipation; combinational and sequential circuits;
arithmetic operations and memories.
124B. Integrated Circuit Design and
Fabrication
(4) Bowers
Prerequisite: ECE 132 with a minimum grade of C-.
Lecture, 4 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Theory, fabrication, and characterization of solid
state devices including P-N junctions, capacitors,
bipolar and MOS devices. Devices are fabricated
using modern VLSI processing techniques including
lithography, oxidation, diffusion, and evaporation.
Physics and performance of processing steps are
discussed and analyzed.
124C. Integrated Circuit Design and
Fabrication
(4) Bowers
Prerequisites: ECE 124B and ECE 137A with a
minimum grade of C- in all. Lecture, 4 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours.
Design, simulation, fabrication, and
characterization of NMOS integrated circuits. Circuit
design and layout is performed using commercial
layout software. Circuits are fabricated using modern
VLSI processing techniques. Circuit and discrete device
electrical performance are analyzed.
124D. VLSI Architecture and Design
(4) Brewer
Prerequisite: ECE 124A with a minimum grade of C-.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 2 hours.
Practical issues in VLSI circuit design, pad/pin
limitations, clocking and interfacing standards,
electrical packaging for high-speed and highperformance
design. On-chip noise and crosstalk,
clock and power distribution, architectural and
circuit design constraints, interconnection limits and
transmission line effects.
125. High Speed Digital Integrated Circuit
Design
(4) Banerjee
Prerequisite: ECE 124A or 137A with a minimum
grade of C- in either. Lecture, 4 hours.
Advanced digital VLSI design: CMOS scaling,
nanoscale issues including variability, thermal
management, interconnects, reliability; non-clocked,
clocked and self-timed logic gates; clocked storage
elements; high-speed components, PLLs and DLLs;
clock and power distribution; memory systems;
signaling and I/O design; low-power design.
130A. Signal Analysis and Processing
(4) madhow
Prerequisites: Mathematics 5A and ECE 2B with
a minimum grade of C- in both; open to EE and
computer engineering majors only. Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 2 hours.
Analysis of continuous time linear systems in
the time and frequency domains. Superposition
and convolution. Bilateral and unilateral Laplace
transforms. Fourier series and Fourier transforms.
Filtering, modulation, and feedback.
130B. Signal Analysis and Processing
(4) Chandrasekaran
Prerequisite: ECE 130A with a grade of C- or better;
open to EE and computer engineering majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Analysis of discrete time linear systems in the time
and frequency domains. Z transforms, Discrete Fourier
transforms. Sampling and aliasing.
130C. Signal Analysis and Processing
(4) Chandrasekaran
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of Cin
both. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Basic techniques for the analysis of linear models
in electrical engineering: Gaussian elimination,
vector spaces and linear equations, orthogonality,
determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, systems
of linear differential equations, positive definite
matrices, singular value decomposition.
132. Introduction to Solid State Electronic
Devices
(4) Mishra
Prerequisites: Physics 4 or 24 with a minimum grade of
C-; Mathematics 5A with a minimum grade of C; and ECE
2A-B (may be taken concurrently) with a minimum grade
of C- in both; open to EE and computer engineering
majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Electrons and holes in semiconductors; doping (P
and N); state occupation statistics, transport properties
of electrons and holes; P-N junction diodes; I-V, C-V,
and switching properties of P-N junctions; introduction
of bipolar transitors, MOSFET’s and JFET’s.
134. Introduction to Fields and Waves
(4) Dagli, York
Prerequisites: Physics 3 or 23 with a minimum grade
of C-; and Mathematics 5A-B with a minimum grade
of C; and Mathematics 5C with a minimum grade of
C-; open to EE and computer engineering majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Introduction to applied electromagnetics and
wave phenomena in high frequency electron circuits
and systems. Wave on transmission-lines, elements
of electrostatics and magnetostatics and appications,
plane waves, examples and applications to RF,
microwave, and optical systems.
135. Optical Fiber Communication
(4) Dagli
Prerequisites: ECE 132 and 134 with a minimum grade 
88 • College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering
of C- in both. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Optical fiber as a transmission medium, dispersion
and nonlinear effects in fiber transmission, fiber and
semiconductor optical amplifiers and lasers, optical
modulators, photo detectors, optical receivers,
wavelength division multiplexing components, optical
filters, basic transmission system analysis and design.
137A. Circuits and Electronics I
(4) Rodwell
Prerequisites: ECE 2A-B-C, 130A, and 132 with a
minimum grade of C- in all; open to EE majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Analysis and design of single stage and multistage
transistor circuits including biasing, gain, impedances
and maximum signal levels.
137B. Circuits and Electronics II
(4) Rodwell
Prerequisites: ECE 2C and 137A with a minimum grade
of C- in both; open to EE majors only. Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours.
Analysis and design of single stage and multistage
transistor circuits at low and high frequencies.
Transient response. Analysis and design of feedback
circuits. Stability criteria.
139. Probability and Statistics
(4) Iltis
Prerequisite: Open to Electrical Engineering, Computer
Engineering and pre-Computer Engineering majors
only. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Fundamentals of probability, conditional probability,
Bayes rule, random variables, functions of random
variables, expectation and high-order moments,
Markov chains, hypothesis testing.
140. Random Processes for Engineering
(4) Iltis
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B and 139 each with a
minimum grade of C-; open to EE majors only. Lecture,
3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
Random processes, characteristic functions,
central limit theorem, spectral analysis, linear systems
with random inputs, representation of bandlimited
processes, Poisson process, simple queueing systems.
141A. Introduction to MicroElectro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
(3) pennatur
Prerequisites: ME 104 and 163; or, ECE 130A and
137A; with a minimum grade of C- in both.
Same course as ME 141A. Lecture, 3 hours.
Analysis of MEMS actuators and displacement
sensors with emphasis on the analysis of capacitorbased
sensing and actuation. Analysis and design of
operational-amplifier models and circuits for capacitor
senors including feedback concepts. Vibration analysis
of MEMS structures including wave equations for
“string” and bar structures. MEMS scaling concepts.
141B. Semiconductor Processing and
Device Characterization with Laboratory
(4) pennatur
Prerequisites: ME 141A or ECE 141A; and, Chemistry
1B-BL.
Same course as ME 141B. Lecture, 2 hours;
laboratory, 6 hours.
Lectures and laboratory on semiconductor
processing for MEMS. Description and analysis for
key semiconductors and equipment used for MEMS.
Design and fabrication of MEMS capacitor-actuator
and accelerometers; includes a description of MEMS
characterization tools.
141C. Introduction to Microfluidics and
BioMEMS
(3) Meinhart
Prerequisite: ME 141A or ECE 141A; open to ME and
EE majors only.
Same course as ME 141C. Lecture, 3 hours.
Introduces physical phenomena associated with
microsale/nanoscale fluid mechanics, microfluids,
and bioMEMS. Analytical methods and numerical
simulation tools are used for analysis of microfluids.
144. Electromagnetic Fields and Waves
(4) York
Prerequisite: ECE 134 with a minimum grade of C-.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Waves on transmission lines, Maxwell’s
equations, skin effect, propagation and reflection of
electromagnetic waves, microwave integrated circuit
principles, metal and dielectric waveguides, resonant
cavities, antennas. Microwave and optical device
examples and experience with modern microwave and
CAD software.
145A. Communication Electronics
(5) Long
Prerequisites: ECE 137A-B with a minimum grade of Cin
both. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Analog communication circuits 1 MHz to 1GHz
with emphasis on receivers. S-parameter design
techniques, nonideal components, distortion, amplifier
design and characterization, system level analysis.
145B. Communication Electronics
(5) Long
Prerequisite: ECE 145A with a minimum grade of C-;
EE majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Analog communication circuits 1 MHz to 1GHz
with emphasis on receivers. Design and evaluation of
RF components: mixers, oscillators, PLL, IF amplifier,
FM demodulator, frequency synthesis.
145C. High Speed Bipolar Mixed Signal
and Communication IC Design
(4) Rodwell
Prerequisites: ECE 137A-B with a minimum grade of
C- in both. Lecture, 4 hours.
Transistor and passive component models.
Broadband amplifiers. Fast digital IC design. Circuit
noise, digital communication receiver sensitivity.
Latched comparator design. Nyquist and oversampled
analog-digital and digital-analog converters. Direct
digital frequency synthesis. Fiber optic and microwave
digital transceivers.
146A. Analog Communication Theory and
Techniques
(5) Iltis
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B and 140 with a minimum
grade of C- in all; open to EE majors only. Lecture, 3
hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Modulation theory, AM, FM, PM, and analog pulse
modulation and demodulation techniques. System
noise and performance calculations.
146B. Digital Communication Theory and
Techniques
(5) Shynk
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B, 140 and 146A with
minimum grades of C-; open to EE majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Elements of source coding: quantization, pulse
code modulation, delta modulation. Introduction
to digital modulation over baseband and passband
channels: linear modulation, Nyquist criterion for
intersymbol interference avoidance, orthogonal
modulation. Optimal reception of signals in Additive
White Gaussian Noise: detection theory basics, signal
space concepts, geometry of maximum likelihood
receivers. Performance analysis of optimal receivers:
error probability as a function of Eb/N0, union bound,
nearest neighbors approximation. Link design: powerbandwidth
tradeoffs, link budget analysis.
147A. Feedback Control Systems - Theory
and Design
(5) Teel, Smith
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B-C with a minimum grade
of C- in each; open to EE and computer engineering
majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Feedback systems design, specifications in time and
frequency domains. Analysis and synthesis of closed
loop systems. Computer aided analysis and design.
147B. Digital Control Systems - Theory
and Design
(5) Smith, Teel
Prerequisite: ECE 147A with a minimum grade of C-;
open to EE and computer engineering majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
Analysis of sampled data feedback systems; state
space description of linear systems; observability,
controllability, pole assignment, state feedback,
observers. Design of digital control systems. (W)
147C. Control System Design Project
(5) Hespanha
Prerequisite: ECE 147A or ME 155B or ME 173 with
a minimum grade of C-. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory,
6 hours.
Students are required to design, implement, and
document a significant control systems project. The
project is implemented in hardware or in high-fidelity
numerical simulators. Lectures and laboratories cover
special topics related to the practical implementation
of control systems.
148. Applications of Signal Analysis and
Processing
(4) Lee
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of Cin
both. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 2 hours.
A sequence of engineering applications of
signal analysis and processing techniques; in
communications, image processing, analog and
digital filer design, signal detection and parameter
estimation, holography and tomography, Fourier
optics, and microwave and acoustic sensing.
149. Active and Passive Network
Synthesis
(4) ILTIS
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing; open to EE
majors only.
Designed for juniors to take right after ECE 130AB.
Combines the areas of electronics and network
theory in the subject of passive and active network
design. Topics include passive synthesis, optimization
techniques, approximations to ideal filters, distributed
networks, sensitivity and the modern design
techniques, and applications of active filters.
151. Distributed Systems
(4) Melliar-Smith
Prerequisite: Computer Science 170 with a minimum
grade of C-.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed Computer Science 171. Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour.
Distributed systems architecture, distributed
programming techniques, message passing,
remote procedure calls, group communication
and membership, naming, asynchrony, causality,
consistency, fault-tolerance and recovery, resource
management, scheduling, monitoring, testing and
debugging.
152A. Digital Design Principles
(5) Rodoplu
Prerequisites: ECE 15 or 15A or Computer Science
30 with a minimum grade of C- in each course; open
to electrical engineering, computer engineering,
and computer science majors only. Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 6 hours.
Design of synchronous digital systems: timing
diagrams, propagation delay, latches and flip-flops,
shift registers and counters, Mealy/Moore finite state
machines, Verilog, 2-phase clocking, timing analysis,
CMOS implementation, S-RAM, RAM-based designs,
ASM charts, state minimization.
152B. Digital Design Methodologies
(5) Cheng
Prerequisites: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of
C-; open to EE, computer engineering, and computer
science majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 6
hours.
Design methodologies of digital systems, the
register and processor levels. Design of functional
subsystems, including arithmetic processors, hardwired
and microprogrammed control units, memory systems,
and bussing systems. System organization including
communication, input/output systems, and multiple
CPU systems.
153A. Hardware/Software Interface
(4) staff
Prerequisite: Computer Science 130A with a minimum
grade of C-.
Same course as Computer Science 153A.
The study of the structures employed at the
interface of hardware and software in modern
computing systems. Instruction set architecture (ISA)
design trade-offs, operating system and hardware
support for input/output devices (memory-mapping,
interrupts, device drivers). Operating system and realtime
system scheduling of tasks. Low level software
and program support infrastructures (virtualization,
compilation, optimization, emulation/simulation,
debugging). 
College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering • 89
153B. Sensor and Peripheral Interface
Design
(4) Butner
Prerequisites: ECE 152B and 153A with a minimum
grade of C- in both. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours.
Hardware description languages; fieldprogrammable
logic and ASIC design techniques.
Mixed-signal techniques: A/D and D/A converter
interfaces; video and audio signal acquisition,
processing and generation, communication and
network interfaces.
154. Introduction to Computer
Architecture
(4) Parhami
Prerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-;
open to EE, computer engineering, and computer
science majors only.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed Computer Science 154. Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour.
The computer design space. Methods of
performance evaluation. Machine instructions and
assembly language. Variations in instruction set
architecture. Design of arithmetic/logic units. Data
path and control unit synthesis. Pipelining and multiple
instruction issue. Hierarchical memory systems. Input/
output and interfacing. High-performance systems,
including multiprocessors and multicomputers.
155A. Introduction to Computer Networks
(4) Moser
Prerequisite: ECE 154 with a minimum grade of C-;
and, Computer Science 12 or 60 with a minimum
grade of C-.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed Computer Science 176 or 176A, or ECE
155. Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Topics in this course include network architectures,
protocols, wired and wireless networks, transmission
media, multiplexing, switching, framing, error
detection and correction, flow control, routing,
congestion control, TCP/IP, DNS, email, World Wide
Web, network security, socket programming in C/C++.
155B. Network Computing
(4) Moser
Prerequisites: ECE 155A with a minimum grade of
C-; and, Computer Science 5JA or 10 or 11JA with a
minimum grade of C-.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed Computer Science 176B or ECE 194W.
Lecture, 3 hours; discussion, 1 hour.
Topics in this course include client/server
computing, threads, Java applets, Java sockets, Java
RMI, Java servlets, Java Server Pages, Java Database
Connectivity, Enterprise Java Beans, Hypertext Markup
Language, extensible Markup Language, Web Services,
programming networked applications in Java.
156A. Digital Design with VHDL and
Synthesis
(4) wang
Prerequisite: ECE 152A with a minimum grade of C-.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Introduction to VHDL basic elements. VHDL
simulation concepts. VHDL concurrent statements
with examples and applications. VHDL subprograms,
packages, libraries and design units. Writing VHDL
for synthesis. Writing VHDL for finite state machines.
Design case study.
156B. Computer-Aided Design of VLSI
Circuits
(4) wang
Prerequisite: ECE 156A with a minimum grade of C-.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Introduction to computer-aided simulation and
synthesis tools for VLSI. VLSI system design flow, role
of CAD tools, layout synthesis, circuit simulation, logic
simulation, logic synthesis, behavior synthesis and test
synthesis.
158. Digital Signal Processing
(4) Gibson
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B with a minimum grade of
C- in both; open to EE majors only.
Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3 hours.
Discrete signals and systems, convolution,
z-transforms, discrete Fourier transforms, digital filters.
160. Multimedia Systems
(4) melliar-smith
Prerequisites: upper-division standing; open to EE,
computer engineering, computer science, and creative
studies majors only. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory, 3
hours.
Introduction to multimedia and applications,
including WWW, image/video databases and video
streaming. Covers media content analysis, media data
organization and indexing (image/video databases),
and media data distribution and interaction (video-ondemand
and interactive TV).
162A. The Quantum Description of
Electronic Materials
(4) bowers
Prerequisites: ECE 130A-B and 134 with a minimum
grade of C- in all; open to EE and materials majors
only.
Same course as Materials 162A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Electrons as particles and waves, Schrodinger’s
equation and illustrative solutions. Tunnelling. Atomic
structure, the exclusion principle and the periodic
table. Bonds. Free electrons in metals, periodic
potentials and energy bands.
162B. Fundamentals of the Solid State
(4) Coldren
Prerequisite: ECE 162A with a minimum grade of C-;
open to EE and materials majors only.
Same course as Materials 162B. Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour.
Crystal lattices and the structure of solids, with
emphasis on semiconductors. Lattice vibrations,
electronic states and energy bands. Electrical and
thermal conduction. Dielectric and optical properties.
Semiconductor devices: diffusio
90 • College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering
not included in the regular departmental curriculum.
Topics covered include (check with department for
quarters offered):
A. Circuits
AA. Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
B. Systems Theory
BB. Computer Engineering
C. Communication Systems
D. Control Systems
E. Signal Processing
F. Solid State
G. Fields and Waves
H. Quantum Electronics
I. Microwave Electronics
J. Switching Theory
K. Digital Systems Design
L. Computer Architecture
M. Computer Graphics
N. Pattern Recognition
O. Microprocessors and Microprocessor-based
Systems
P. Simulation
Q. Imaging Systems and Image Processing
R. General
S. Speech
T. Robot Control
U. Optoelectronics
V. Scientific Computation
W. Computer Network
X. Distributed Computation
Y. Numerical Differential Equations
Z. Nanotechnology
196. Undergraduate Research
(2-4) Staff
Prerequisites: upper-division standing; consent of
instructor.
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average for
the preceding three quarters. May be repeated for up
to 12 units. Not more than 4 units may be applied to
departmental electives.
Research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Students will be expected to give regular
oral presentations, actively participate in a weekly
seminar, and prepare at least one written report on
their research.
199. Independent Studies in Electrical and
Computer Engineering
(1-5) Staff
Prerequisites: upper division standing; completion of
two upper-division courses in electrical and computer
engineering; consent of instructor.
Must have a minimum 3.0 grade-point average
for the preceding three quarters. Students are limited
to five units per quarter and 30 units total in all
98/99/198/199/199DC/199RA courses combined.
Directed individual study, normally experimental.
Graduate Courses
201A. Electromagnetic Theory I
(4) dagli
Prerequisite: ECE 144. Lecture, 4 hours.
Basic concepts in electromagnetic theory, energy
power, plane waves, guided waves, dielectric metallic
waveguides, radiation, uniqueness, image theory,
reciprocity, duality, equivalence principle, induction
theorem.
205A. Information Theory
(4) Rose
Prerequisites: ECE 140 or equivalent, or PSTAT 120A-B.
Same course as Computer Science 225. Lecture,
4 hours.
Entropy, mutual information, and Shannon’s
coding theorems; lossless source coding, Huffman,
Shannon-Fano-Elias, and arithmetic codes; channel
capacity; rate-distortion theory, and lossy source
coding; source-channel coding; algorithmic complexity
and information; applications of information theory in
various fields.
207. Research Projects or Independent
Studies
(1-6) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Variable hours.
Graduate research projects or independent
studies to be arranged between students and staff
members. See M.S. degree requirements, plans 1 and
2, regarding number of units which may be used for
M.S. degree.
210A. Matrix Analysis and Computation
(4) Chandrasekaran
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211A,
Mathematics 206A, ME 210A, Chemical Engineering
211A, and Geology 251A. Students should be
proficient in basic numerical methods, linear
algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some
programming language. Lecture, 4 hours.
Graduate level-matrix theory with introduction
to matrix computations. SVD’s, pseudoinverses,
variational characterization of eigen values,
perturbation theory, direct and iterative methods for
matrix computations.
210B. Numerical Simulation
(4) petzold
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211B,
Mathematics 206B, ME 210B, Chemical Engineering
211B and Geology 251B. Students should be
proficient in basic numerical methods, linear
algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some
programming language. Lecture, 4 hours.
Linear multistep methods and Runge-Kutta
methods for ordinary differential equations: stability,
order and convergence. Stiffness. Differential algebraic
equations. Numerical solution of boundary value
problems.
210C. Numerical Solution of Partial
Differential Equations—Finite Difference
Methods
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211C,
Mathematics 206C, ME 210C, Chemical Engineering
211C and Geology 251C. Students should be
proficient in basic numerical methods, linear
algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some
programming language. Lecture, 4 hours.
Finite difference methods for hyperbolic, parabolic
and elliptic PDEs, with application to problems in
science and engineering. Convergence, consistency,
order and stability of finite difference methods.
Dissipation and dispersion. Finite volume methods.
Software design and adaptivity.
210D. Numerical Solution of Partial
Differential Equations—Finite Element
Methods
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Same course as Computer Science 211D,
Mathematics 206D, ME 210D, Chemical Engineering
211D and Geology 251D. Students should be
proficient in basic numerical methods, linear
algebra, mathematically rigorous proofs, and some
programming language. Lecture, 4 hours.
Weighted residual and finite element methods
for the solution of hyperbolic, parabolic and elliptical
partial differential equations, with application to
problems in science and engineering. Error estimates.
Standard and discontinuous Galerkin methods.
211A. Engineering Quantum
Mechanics I
(4) Staff
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B. Students must have some
knowledge of linear algebra.
Same course as Materials 211A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Wave-particle duality; bound states; uncertainty
relations; expectation values and operators; variational
principle; eigenfunction expansions; perturbation
theory I. Treatment matches needs and background of
ECE and Materials students emphasizing solid state or
quantum electronics.
211B. Engineering Quantum Mechanics II
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: ECE 211A or Materials 211A, or ECE
215A or Materials 206A.
Same course as Materials 211B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Continuation of ECE 211A; symmetry and
degeneracy; electrons in crystals, angular momentum;
perturbation theory II; transition probabilities;
quantized fields and radiative transitions; magnetic
fields; electron spin; indistinguishable particles.
215A. Fundamentals of Electronic Solids I
(4) Brown
Prerequisite: ECE 162A or 162B.
Same course as Materials 206A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Introduction into the physics of semiconductors
for beginning engineering graduate students. Crystal
structure. Reciprocal lattice and crystal diffraction.
Electrons in periodic structures. Energy and bands.
Semiconductor electrons and probes, Fermi
statistics.
215B. Fundamentals of Electronic Solids II
(4) Brown
Prerequisite: ECE 162A or 162B.
Same course as Materials 206B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Phonons, electron scattering, electronic transport,
selected optical properties, heterostructures, effective
mass, quantum wells, two-dimensional electron gas,
quantum wires, deep levels, crystal binding.
216B. Defects in Semiconductors
(4) petroff
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B.
Same course as Materials 216. Lecture, 3 hours.
Structural and electronic properties of elementar
defects in semiconductors. Point defects and
impurity complexes. Deep levels. Dislocations and
grain boundary electronic properties. Measurement
techniques for radiative and nonradiative defect
centers.
217. Molecular Beam Epitaxy and Band
Gap Engineering
(3) Gossard
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B and 213.
Same course as Materials 217. Lecture, 3 hours.
Fundamentals and recent research developments
in the growth and properties of thin crystalline films
of electronic and optical materials by the process of
molecular beam epitaxy. Artificially structured materials
with quantized electron confinement and artificially
engineered electronic band structure properties.
218A. Communication Electronics
(4) Long
Prerequisites: ECE 137A-B or equivalent.
Analog communication circuits 1 MHz to 1 GHz
with emphasis on receivers. S-parameter design
techniques, nonideal components, distortion, amplifier
design and characterization, system level analysis.
218B. Communication Electronics
(4) Long
Prerequisite: ECE 218A.
Analog communication circuits 1 MHz to 1 GHz
with emphasis on receivers. Design and evaluation of
RF components: mixers, oscillators, PLL, IF amplifier,
FM demodulator, frequency synthesis.
218C. High Speed Bipolar Mixed Signal
and Communication IC Design
(4) Rodwell
Prerequisites: ECE 137A-B or equivalent; graduate
standing.
Transistor and passive component models.
Broadband amplifier design. Fast digital IC design at
the transistor level. Circuit noise, signal/noise ratios,
digital communication receiver sensitivity. Latched
comparator design. Nyquist and oversampled analogdigital
and digital-analog converters. Direct digital
frequency synthesis. Fiber optic and microwave digital
transceivers.
219. CMOS & RF INTEGRATED CIRCUIT
DESIGN
(4) YUE
Prerequisite: ECE 137A and 137B.
Recommended Preparation: ECE 145A/218A and
ECE 145B/218B.
Covers the design and analysis of radio-frequency
integrated systems at the transistor level using stateof-the-art
CMOS technology. Focuses on system-level
trade-offs in transceiver design, practical RF circuit
techniques, and physical understanding for device
parasitics.
220A. Semiconductor Device Processing
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: ECE 132 or equivalent.
Same course as Materials 215A. Lecture, 3 hours;
discussion, 1 hour.
College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering • 91
Intensive theoretical and laboratory instruction in
solid-state device and integrated circuit fabrication.
Topics include 1) semiconductor material properties
and characterization; 2) phase diagrams; 3) diffusion;
4) thermal oxidation; 5) vacuum processes; 6) thinfilm
deposition; 7) scanning electron microscopy.
Both gallium arsenide and silicon technologies are
presented.
220B-C. Semiconductor Device Processing
(4-4) Hu
Prerequisite: ECE 220A.
Same course as Materials 215B-C. Lecture, 3
hours; discussion 1 hour.
Continued theoretical and laboratory instruction in
the fundamentals, the design, the fabrication, and the
characterization of junction and field-effect devices.
Topics will include bipolar characterization, design,
fabrication, and testing. The laboratory effort initiated
in ECE 220A will be continued in these two quarters.
221A. Semiconductor Device Physics I
(4) Mishra
Prerequisites: ECE 132 and 162A-B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Band diagrams of P-N junctions and
heterojunctions; current flow by drift and diffusion;
bipolar transistors; recombination and generation.
Schottky barriers; heterostructures.
221B. Semiconductor Device Physics II
(4) Mishra
Prerequisites: ECE 215A and 221A. Lecture, 4 hours.
More advanced continuation of ECE 221A: field
effect transistors, quantum wells and superlattices;
tunneling; avalanche breakdown; physical limitations
of bipolar and field effect transistors; two-dimensional
current flow problems.
224A. VLSI Project Design
(4) BREWER
Prerequisite: ECE 124A or equivalent and ECE
124D/256C
Design, planning and layout of a CMOS/
Mixed-Signal VLSI Integrated Circuit for fabrication,
characterization and test. Layout rules, topological,
and physical issues in the design of integrated systems.
Student teams plan, design and test a VLSI project.
224B. VLSI Project Testing
(4) Butner
Prerequisite: ECE 224A. Lecture, 2 hours; laboratory,
2 hours.
Test equipment and testing techniques. Methods
for diagnosing design problems. Students perform
laboratory testing of their fabricated designs from ECE
224A.
225. High Speed Digital Integrated Circuit
Design
(4) Banerjee
Prerequisite: ECE 124A or 137A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Advanced digital VLSI design: CMOS scaling,
nanoscale issues including variability, thermal
management, interconnects, reliability; non-clocked,
clocked and self-timed logic gates; clocked storage
elements; high-speed components, PLLs and DLLs;
clock and power distribution; memory systems;
signaling and I/O design; low-power design.
226. Level Set Methods
(4) Gibou
Prerequisite: Computer Science 211C or Chemical
Engineering 211C or ECE 210C or ME 210C.
Same course as Chemical Engineering 226,
Computer Science 216, and ME 216.
Mathematical description of the level set method
and design of the numerical methods used in its
implementations (ENO-WENO, Godunov, Lax-Friedrich,
etc.). Introduction to the Ghost Fluid Method.
Applications in CFD. Materials Sciences, Computer
Vision and Computer Graphics.
227A. Semiconductor Lasers I
(4) Coldren
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B-C or 144. Lecture, 4 hours.
Review of semiconductor physics, growth
technology, and materials properties; doubleheterostructure
and quantum-well laser structures;
carrier and photon rate equations; light vs. current
characteristics; scattering and transmission matrices;
compound cavity, distributed Bragg reflector, and
distributed feedback lasers.
227B. Semiconductor Lasers II
(4) Coldren
Prerquisites: ECE 227A and 215A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Gain and spontaneous emission vs. injection
current in semiconductors; nonradiative
recombination; strained-layer quantum wells. Dynamic
characteristics of lasers including differential and large
signal analysis of the rate equations; relative intensity
noise and linewidth; carrier transport and feedback
effects.
227C. Photonic Integrated Circuits
(4) Coldren
Prerequisites: ECE 227A-B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Perturbation and coupled-mode analysis; DFB
lasers revisited; directional couplers; modal excitation.
Dielectric waveguide analysis techniques; waveguide
radiation losses. Photonic integrated circuit examples,
including tunable lasers with in-line gratings and
contra- and co-directional couplers; ring lasers;
numerical analysis techniques.
228A. Fiber Optic Communications
(4) Bowers
Prerequisites: ECE 162A-B-C, 135, 144. Lecture, 4
hours.
Optical fiber structures and guided modes. Effect
of dispersion, attenuation and fiber, nonlinearities.
Basic transmission design including loss and rise
time budgets. Optical transmission system essentials
and requirements. Introduction to WDM and TDM
components and technologies.
228B. Fiber Optic Components and
Systems
(4) Bowers
Prerequisite: ECE 228A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Photodetector design and receiver characteristics.
Optical transmitters, optical amplifiers, optical
isolators, optical switches, wavelength converters,
regenerators, optical multiplexers, and demultiplexers.
Advanced transmission link design and performance
including bit error rate and signal to noise ratio and
fiber transmission impairments.
228C. Optical Networks
(4) Bowers
Prerequisite: ECE 228B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Introduction to optical network architectures
including long-haul, wide-area, metro and access
networks. First generation networks including
SONET and Gigabit Ethernet. Second generation
networks including optical circuit switched network
concepts, control plane, protection switching, routing
wavelength assignment, and network management
and control.
229. Hybrid Systems
(4) Hespanha
Prerequisite: graduate standing in mechanical
engineering, chemical engineering, electrical &
computer engineering, or computer science.
Recommended preparation: ECE 147A or similar
course.
Introduction to systems that combine continuous
dynamics with discrete logic. Topics include a modeling
framework that combines elements from automata
theory and differential equations, simulation tools,
analysis and design techniques for hybrid systems and
applications of hybrid control systems.
230A-B. Linear Systems I, II
(4-4) hespanha, Bamieh
Prerequisites: ME 210A (for 230A): ECE 140; and, ECE
230A or ME 243A; and ME 210A (for 230B).
Same course as ME 243A-B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Internal and external descriptions. Solution of
state equations. Controllability and observability
realizations. Pole assignment, observers; modern
compensator design. Disturbance localizations and
decoupling. Least-squares control. Least-squares
estimation; Kalman filters; smoothing. The separation
theorem; LQG compensator design. Computational
considerations. Selected additional topics.
232. Introductory Robust Control with
Applications
(4) Smith, Khammash
Prerequisites: ECE 230A or ME 255A; and ECE 230B or
ME 243B (may be taken concurrently).
Same course as ME 256.
Robust Control theory; uncertainty modeling;
stabilty of systems in the presence of norm-bounded
perturbations; induced norm performance problems;
structured singular value analysis; H-infinity control
theory; model reduction; computer simulation based
design projectinvolving practical problems.
234. Modeling, Identification, and
Validation for Control
(4) Smith
Prerequisite: ECE 230A. Lecture, 3 hours.
Parametric and non-parametric models, open and
closed-loop identification, bias and variance effects,
model order selection, probing signal design, subspace
identification, closed-loop probing, autotuning, model
validation, iterative identification and design.
235. Stochastic Processes in Engineering
(4) Iltis
Prerequisites: ECE 140; graduate standing. Lecture, 4
hours.
A first-year graduate course in stochastic processes,
including: review of basic probability; Gaussian,
Poisson, and Wiener processes; wide-sense stationary
processes; covariance function and power spectral
density; linear systems driven by random inputs; basic
Wiener and Kalman filter theory.
236. Nonlinear Control Systems
(4) Teel
Same course as ME 236.
Recommended preparation: ECE 230A. Lecture,
4 hours.
Analysis and design of nonlinear control systems.
Focus on Lyapunov stability theory, with sufficient time
devoted to contrasts between linear and nonlinear
systems, input-output stability and the describing
function method.
237. Nonlinear Control Design
(4) Teel
Prerequisite: ECE 236 or ME 236.
Same course as ME 237. Lecture, 4 hours.
Stabilizability by linearization and by geometric
methods. State feedback design and input/output
linearization. Observability and output feedback
design. Singular perturbations and composite control.
Backstepping design of robust controllers for systems
with uncertain nonlinearities. Adaptive nonlinear
control.
238. Advanced Control Design Laboratory
(4) Smith
Prerequisites: ECE 230A; and, ECE 232A or ECE 237
or ME 237 or ECE 249 or ME 270A or Chemical
Engineering 252. Lecture, 2 hours; laboratory, 6 hours.
A laboratory course requiring students to design
and implement advanced control systems on a physical
experiment. Experiments from any engineering or
scientific discipline are chosen by the student.
240A. Optimal Estimation and Filtering
(4) Shynk
Prerequisites: ECE 140 and 210A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Optimal estimation concepts and theory (minimum
variance, least-squares, and maximum likelihood
estimation), optimal recursive algorithms for discreteand
continuous-time filtering of noisy signals and
data. Wiener and Kalman filters, stability of recursive
optimal filtering algorithms, modeling errors in
recursive filters.
241. Multimedia Compression
(4) Gibson
Prerequisites: ECE 140 or 235; and ECE 158.
Not open for credit to students who have
completed MAT 221. Lecture, 4 hours.
Covers the principle standards of speech, audio,
still image and video compression with emphasis on
system performance, key underlying algorithms and
technologies, current applications and the projected
future evolution of the standards.
242. Digital Signal Compression
(4) ROSE
Prerequisites: ECE 140 or 235; and ECE 146B. Lecture,
3 hours.
Principles and techniques of signal compression
systems. Basic quantization theory, linear prediction,
predictive coding, transform and subband coding,
entropy coding, and vector quantization. Techniques
and algorithms for efficient trade-offs between fidelity,
bit-rate, and complexity. Applications to speech, audio,
image and video compression. 
92 • College of Engineering: Electrical and Computer Engineering
243A. Digital Communication Theory
(4) Shynk
Prerequisite: ECE 146B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Review of probability and random waveforms,
optimum receiver principles, efficient signaling,
bounds on error probability, convolutional coding,
channel capacity, emphasis on geometric approach to
signal description.
243B. Advanced Digital Communication
Theory
(4) Shynk
Prerequisite: ECE 243A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Bandlimited channels and optimum receiver for
ISI channels; linear, decision-feedback, blind, and
adaptive equalization; multichannel and multicarrier
systems; spread-spectrum signals; direct sequence and
frequency hopped; fading multipath channels and
diversity techniques; multiuser communications.
245. Adaptive Filter Theory
(4) Shynk
Prerequisites: ECE 140, 158, and 210A (may be taken
concurrently). Lecture, 4 hours.
Theory and analysis of adaptive filters. Optimal
filtering, linear prediction, method of least squares.
Steepest-descent and Newton search methods,
gradient estimation, LMS adaptive algorithm, recursive
least squares. Gradient and least-squares lattice
algorithms for joint-process estimation. Convergence
analysis, stability conditions, time constants,
misadjustment. (offered in alternate years.)
247. System Identification
(4) staff
Prerequisite: ECE 230A. Lecture, 4 hours.
On-line identification of continuous- and discretetime
systems. Linear parameterizations. Continuous
gradient and least squares algorithms. Stability,
persistent excitation and parameter convergence.
Robust algorithms for imperfect models. Averaging.
Discrete-time equation-error identifiers. Output-error
methods.
248. Kalman and Adaptive Filtering
(4) Staff
Prerequisites: ECE 210A, 230A and 235 (may be taken
concurrently). Lecture, 4 hours.
Least-squares estimation for processes with statespace
models. Wiener filters and spectral factorization.
Kalman filters, smoothing and square-root algorithms.
Steady-state filters. Extended Kalman filters for nonlinear
models. Fixed-order and order-recursive adaptive
filters.
249. Adaptive Control Systems
(4) Kokotovic
Prerequisites: ECE 236 and 247. Lecture, 4 hours.
Models of plants with unknown parameters.
Boundedness properties of parameter update laws.
Adaptive linear control. Stability and robustness to
modeling errors and disturbances. Backstepping statefeedback
design of direct adaptive nonlinear control.
Output-feedback design. Nonlinear swapping. Indirect
adaptive nonlinear control.
250. Wireless Communication and
Networking
(4) Rodoplu
Prerequisites: ECE 155A and 146A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Overview of wireless networks, characteristics of
wireless medium, physical layer operation (spread
spectrum, UWB, OFDM, adaptive modulation, MIMO
channel), cellular planning, mobility management,
energy-efficient networking, GSM, CDMA, wireless
LANs, ad hoc networks, wireless geolocation systems.
252B. Computer Arithmetic
(4) Parhami
Prerequisites: ECE 152A-B. Lecture, 4 hours.
Standard and unconventional number
representations. Design of fast two-operand and multioperand
adders. High-speed multiplication and division
algorithms. Floating-point numbers, algorithms, and
errors. Hardware algorithms for function evaluation.
Pipelined, digit-serial, and fault-tolerant arithmetic
processors.
253. Embedded System Design
(4) Kastner
Lecture, 4 hours.
Design and application of embedded computing
systems. System synthesis techniques including
partitioning, scheduling, contro and data flow analysis
and behavioral transformations. Reconfigurable
systems. Design environments and models of
computation for embedded applications. Compilation
for embedded microprocessors.
254A. Advanced Computer Architecture:
Supercomputers
(4) Melliar-Smith
Prerequisite: ECE 154. Lecture, 4 hours.
Design and application aspects of highperformance
uniprocessors and shared memory
multiprocessors. Memory design issues: cache
memories, address translation, interleaving.
Processor design issues: instruction sets, pipelining,
vector processing. Software issues: explicit/implicit
vectorization, vector-processing languages, optimizing
compilers. Case studies of designs and applications.
254B. Advanced Computer Architecture:
Parallel Processing
(4) Parhami
Prerequisite: ECE 254A. Lecture, 4 hours.
The nature of concurrent computations. Idealized
models of parallel systems. Practical realization of
concurrency. Interconnection networks. Building-block
parallel algorithms. Algorithm design, optimality, and
efficiency. Mapping and scheduling of computations.
Example multiprocessors and multicomputers.
254C. Advanced Computer Architecture:
Distributed Systems
(4) Melliar-Smith
Prerequisite: ECE 254A.
Multicomputers and distributed architectures.
Message-based asynchronous computations.
Distributed algorithms and their performance.
Hardware issues: nodes, links, and communication
mechanisms. Control issues: synchronization, global
state determination, distributed consensus, and fault
tolerance. Software issues: operating systems and
languages.
255A. VLSI Testing Techniques
(4) Cheng
Prerequisites: ECE 152A, knowledge of C language,
data structures and algorithms. Lecture, 4 hours.
Concepts, algorithms and design techniques
for VLSI testing. Fault modeling, fault simulation,
automatic test generation, design for testability,
built-in self test, testability analysis, delay testing and
synthesis for testability.
255B. VLSI Design Validation
(4) Wang
Prerequisites: ECE 255A, knowledge of C language,
data structures and algorithms; consent of instructor.
Lecture, 4 hours.
Theories and concepts in verification. Verification
tools and methodologies. Functional verification,
equivalence checking, symbolic simulation, error
modeling, verification coverage, silicon debug, on-chip
validation, test and verification.
256A. Introduction to Design Automation
(4) Marek-Sadowska
Prerequisites: ECE 124A or ECE 224A; knowledge of C
language; Algorithms and Data Structures, equivalent
to Computer Science 130A-B. Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 2 hours.
Overview of physical level design automation.
Partitioning, placement, routing and structured
design of VLSI and PC-board structures. Techniques
will include graph theoretic algorithms, integer linear
programming, force-directed and simulated annealing
neuristics.
256B. Logic Design Automation
(4) Brewer
Prerequisite: ECE 256A. Lecture, 3 hours; laboratory,
2 hours.
CAD algorithms for VLSI logic and module level
design. Special attention paid to timing, area, and
power trade-offs. Cell design systems and associated
lab with state of the art VLSI design tools. (W)
256C. Advanced VLSI Architecture and
Design
(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: ECE 124A or equivalent or ECE 256A or
256B
Large scale VLSI design with attention to
performance constraints in real-world designs. Topics
include: circuit modeling, communication parasitics,
architecture optimization, and packaging. Large scale
project will be fabricated using silicon compilation
tools.
256D. Algorithmic Logic Synthesis
(4) Marek-Sadowska
Prerequisite: ECE 256A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Companion course for ECE 256B. Algorithmic
extension of logic synthesis and techniques. Topics
covered include: two and multilevel minimization,
technology mapping, logic partitioning, and testable
logic.
257A. Fault Tolerant Computing
(4) parhami
Prerequisites: ECE 152A-B. Lecture, 3 hours.
Basic concepts of dependable computing.
Reliability of nonredundant and redundant systems.
Dealing with circuit-level defects. Logic-level fault
testing and tolerance. Error detection and correction.
Diagnosis and reconfiguration for system-level
malfunctions. Degradation management. Failure
modeling and risk assessment.
258A. Advanced Digital Signal Processing
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: ECE 158. Lecture, 4 hours.
Digital filter design, discrete random signals, effects
of finite word length arithmetic, fast Fourier transform
and applications, power spectrum estimation.
258B. Multirate Digital Signal Processing
(4) Staff
Prerequisites: ECE 158 and ECE 258A. Lecture, 4
hours.
Multirate digital filter theory, polyphase
decomposition, decimator and interpolar design,
efficient implementations, orthogonal transforms,
wavelet transform, analysis and synthesis filter banks,
quadrature mirror filter banks, transmultiplexer,
subhand decomposition, applications.
258C. VLSI Digital Signal Processing
Systems
(4) Staff
Prerequisites: ECE 158 and ECE 258A. Lecture, 4
hours.
Characteristics and representations of signal
processing programs, iteration bound, pipelining
and parallel processing, retiming and unfolding
transformations, fast convolution algorithms,
algorithmic strength reductions in filters and
transforms. (offered every even-numbered year)
259A. Digital Speech Processing
(4) Rabiner
Prerequisite: ECE 158 and ECE 242. Lecture, 4 hours.
Speech sounds, acoustic phonetics, speech
production and perception. Digital filter modeling
of the vocal tract as a lossless tube. Short-time
characteristics of speech in the time and frequency
domains. Waveform and linear predictive coding of
speech. Speech synthesis and recognition.
259B. Fundamentals of Speech
Recognition
(4) Rabiner
Prerequisite: ECE 158 and ECE 242. Lecture, 4 hours.
Course covers the fundamental design principles
of automatic speech recognition systems, including
speech detection, time alignment and normalization
(including dynamic time warping methods), distortion
measures, the Hidden Markov Model (HMM),
grammar networks and the use of Finite State
Network representations. (Offered alternate years.)
260A. Principles of Quantum Electronics
(4) Yeh
Prerequisite: ECE 144A or 162C. Lecture, 4 hours.
Energy levels in atoms, ions, and molecules.
Interaction between radiation and quantized systems.
Stimulated emission devices. Optical resonators.
Lasers. (offered alternate years)
267. Confined Electrons and Photons in
Semiconductor Structures
(3) Petroff
Prerequisite: Materials 162A-B or ECE 162A-B.
Same course as Materials 267. Lecture, 3 hours.
The properties of 1D, 2D and 3D confined
electrons in semiconductor are reviewed. Properties
of photons in microcavities and photonic crystals are
introduced. Applications of photonic crystals to light 
College of Engineering: Engineering Sciences • 93
extraction and modifications of the emitter properties
are developed.
271A. Principles of Optimization
(4) Chandrabekaran
Prerequisite: ECE 210A (may be taken concurrently).
Lecture, 4 hours.
Linear programming: simplex and revised simplex
method, duality theory, primal-dual algorithms,
Karmarkar’s algorithm. Network flow problems:
max-flow/min-cut theorem, Ford-Fulkerson
algorithm, shortest path algorithms. Complexity
and NP-completeness theory: the classes of P and
NP, reductions between NP-complete problems,
pseudopolynomial and approximation algorithms.
271B. Numerical Optimization Methods
(4) Staff
Prerequisite: ECE 210A. Lecture, 4 hours.
Unconstrained nonlinear problems: basic properties
of solutions and algorithms, global convergence,
convergence rate, and complexity considerations.
Constrained nonlinear problems: basic properties
of solutions and algorithms. Primal, penalty and
barrier, cutting plane, and dual methods. Computer
implementations.
271C. Optimal Control of Dynamic
Systems
(4) BAMIEH
Prerequisite: ECE 230A or ME 243A or equivalent
Calculus of variations and Gateaux and Frechet
derivatives. Optimization in dynamic systems and
Pontryagin’s principle. Invariant Imbedding and
deterministic and stochastic Dynamic Programming.
Numerical solutions of optimal control problems.
Min-max problems and differential games. Extensive
treatment of Linear Quadratic Problems.
277B. Pattern Recognition
(4) Rose
Prerequisites: ECE 130C and 140. Lecture, 4 hours.
Principles and design of pattern recognition
systems. Statistical classifiers: discriminant functions;
Bayes, minimum-risk, k-nearest neighbors,
perceptrons. Clustering and estimation; criteria;
k-means, fuzzy, hierarchical, graph-theoretic, simulated
and deterministic annealing; maximum likelihood and
Bayesian methods; nonparametric methods. Overview
of applications.
278A. Digital Image Processing
(4) Manjunath
Prerequisite: ECE 158 or ECE 178. Lecture, 3 hours;
laboratory, 3 hours.
Two-dimensional signals and systems. Twodimensional
Fourier and z-transforms. Discrete
Fourier transform, two-dimensional digital filters.
Image processing basics, image enhancement and
restoration. Special image processing software
available for laboratory experimentation.
278C. Imaging Systems
(4) Lee
Prerequisites: ECE 158 and 178. Lecture, 4 hours.
Generalized holography, backward techniques,
resolution limit, X-ray tomography, diffraction
tomography, NMR imaging, synthetic-aperture radar,
active sonar imaging, acoustic microscopy, imaging
algorithms, motion estimation and tracking.
279. Computer System Performance
Evaluation
(4) STAFF
Prerequisite: ECE 140, ECE 154, and Computer Science
170.
Overview of the evaluation of comput er system
performance. Measurement, simulation, and analytic
techniques for performance analysis. System work load
characterization. Examples of performance evaluation
for system selection, tuning, and design. Evaluation of
program performance.
281B. Advanced Topics in Computer
Vision
(4) Manjunath
Prerequisite: ECE 181B. Lecture, 3 hours.
Same course as Computer Science 281B.
Advanced topics in computer vision: image
sequence analysis, spatiotemporal filtering, camera
calibration and hand-eye coordination, robot
navigation, shape representation, physically-based
modeling, multi-sensory fusion, biological models,
expert vision systems, and other topics selected from
recent research papers.
282. Error Correcting Codes
(4) Rose
Prerequisite: ECE 130C or 140. Lecture, 3 hours.
Principles and techniques for combating channel
errors in data transmission or storage. Introduction to
Galois fields. Linear block codes (particularly Hamming,
BCH, Reed-Solomon). Convolution codes. Encoding
and decoding algorithms (including spectral methods,
maximum likelihood and Viterbi decoding.)
290. Ethics in Academic and Industrial
Research
(2) Smith
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Lecture, 2 hours.
Case study/analysis format addressing ethical issues
in research conduct: moral reasoning, authorship,
scholarship, copyright, misconduct, fraud, falsification,
mentor/protege relationships, confidentiality, patents,
consulting, conflicts of interest, funding and control of
research, reviewing and editing, sexual relationships in
the workplace.
293. Internship in Industry
(1-6) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of department.
May be repeated to a maximum of 6 units.
Variable hours.
Special projects for selected students. Offered in
conjunction with engineering practice in selected
industrial and research firms, under direct faculty
supervision.
295. Group Studies: Controls, Dynamical
Systems, and Computation
(1) Staff
Same course as Chemical Engineering 295,
Computer Science 592, and ME 295. Seminar, 1 hour.
A series of weekly lectures given by university staff
and outside experts in the fields of control systems,
dynamical systems, and computation.
493. Internship in Industry
(1-12) staff
Prerequisite: Graduate student standing; open to EE
and computer engineering majors only.
Special projects for selected students. Offered in
conjunction with engineering practice in selected
industrial and research firms, under direct faculty
supervision.
502. Teaching of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
(1-4) Staff
Open to electrical and computer engineering
teaching assistants only. No unit credit allowed toward
advanced degree. Variable hours.
Procedures and techniques for teaching electrical
engineering or computer engineering gained through
actual teaching of lecture courses, leading discussion
sections, and/or teaching engineering laboratories.
Meetings will be held as needed to discuss problems,
methods, and procedures.
594AA-ZZ. Special Topics in Electrical and
Computer Engineering
(1-5) Staff
Prerequisites: consent of instructor and graduate status.
May be repeated for credit if there is no
duplication of course content. Seminar, 1-5 hours.
Instruction in these courses may be carried out by
lecture, or by laboratory, or by a combination of these.
These courses provide a study of topics of current
interest in various areas of electrical and computer
engineering. Special topics are coded as follows (check
with department for quarters offered):
A. Circuits
AA. Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
B. Systems Theory
BB. Computer Engineering
C. Communication Systems
D. Control Systems
E. Signal Processing
F. Solid State
G. Fields and Waves
H. Quantum Electronics
I. Microwave Electronics
J. Switching Theory
K. Digital Systems Design
L. Computer Architecture
M. Computer Graphics
N. Pattern Recognition
O. Microprocessors and Microprocessor-based
Systems
P. Simulation
Q. Imaging Systems and Image Processing
R. General
S. Speech
T. Robot Control
U. Optoelectronics
V. Scientific Computation
W. Computer Network
X. Distributed Computation
Y. Numerical Differential Equations
Z. Nanotechnology
595AA-ZZ. Group Studies in Electrical and
Computer Engineering
(1) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
No unit credit allowed toward degree. May be
repeated for enrollment credit if there is no duplication
of course content. Seminar, 1 hour.
Instruction in research group meetings carried out
by lecture, by laboratory, or by a combination of the
two. Courses provide a critical review of research in
various areas of electrical and computer engineering.
596. Directed Research
(2-12) Staff
Research, either experimental or theoretical, May
be undertaken by properly qualified graduate students
under the direction of a faculty member.
597. Individual Studies for M.S.
Comprehensive Examinations and Ph.D.
Examinations
(1-12) Staff
No unit credit allowed toward advanced degree.
Enrollment limited to 24 units per exam.
Individual studies for M.S. comprehensive
examinations and Ph.D. examinations. Maximum
of 12 units per quarter. S/U grading. Instructor is
normally student’s major professor or chair of doctoral
committee.
598. Master’s Thesis Research and
Preparation
(1-12) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of graduate advisor.
For research underlying the thesis and writing of
the thesis.
599. Ph.D. Dissertation Research and
Preparation
(1-12) Staff
Prerequisite: consent of chair of student’s doctoral
committee.
Research and preparation of dissertation. 