LOWER-DIVISION
1A-B-C. Mesa Orientation Course (1-1-1)
Students will be given an introduction to the engineering
profession and our undergraduate program.
Exercises and practicums will develop the problemsolving
skills needed to succeed in engineering. One
and a half hours of lecture.Prerequisite: none.(F,W,S) M.L.
Rudee
20A. Introduction to Electrical Engineering I (4)
Areas of electrical engineering from Ohm’s Law to semiconductor
physics to engineering ethics are discussed,
demonstrated, and experienced. Principles introduced in
lectures are put to use as student lab teams build a working
system.The first quarter emphasizes analog electronics.
Two hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, three
hours of laboratory. (Lab fee: $35) Prerequisite: Math. 20A
must be taken concurrently.(F,W,S) A. Sebald
20B. Introduction to Electrical Engineering II (4)
This continuation of ECE 20A emphasizes semiconductor
devices and digital electronics. Lab teams complete their
system as they learn engineering design methods.
Students are prepared for proceeding toward their choice
of an electrical engineering profession. Two hours of lecture,
one hour of discussion, three hours of laboratory.
(Lab fee: $35) Prerequisites: ECE 20A and Math. 20A with
grades of C- or better, Math.20B must be taken concurrently.
(F,W,S) K. Quest
30. Introduction to Computer Engineering (4)
This course is designed to introduce the fundamentals
of both the hardware and software in a computer system.
Topics include: representation of information,
computer organization and design, assembly and
microprogramming, current technology in logic design.
(Students who have taken CSE 30 may not take ECE 30
for credit.) Three hours of lecture, four hours of laboratory.
Prerequisite: ECE 20B and CSE 11 or 8A-B with grades
of C- or better.(F,W) K. Yun
53A. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering I (4)
This is a coordinated lecture and laboratory course for
students majoring in other branches of science and
engineering. It covers analysis and design of passive
and active circuits. The course emphasizes problemsolving
and laboratory work on passive circuits. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, one hour of
laboratory. Prerequisites: Math. 21C, Math. 21D must be
concurrent, Phys. 2B or BS or 4C with grades of C– or better.(F,W)
P. Cosman
53B. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering II (4)
This is a coordinated lecture and laboratory course for
students majoring in other branches of science and
engineering. It covers analog and digital systems and
active circuit design. Laboratory work will include operational
amplifiers, diodes and transistors. Two hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion, three hours of laboratory.
Prerequisites: Phys. 2B or BS or 4C, ECE 53A, Math.
20C-D or 21C, 21D with grades of C– or better. (W,S) B.
Rickett
60A. Circuits and Systems I (4)
Voltage-current relationships for circuit elements,
Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws, source transformations,
loop and node analysis, initial conditions, the
Laplace transform, inverse transforms, partial fraction
expansions. Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion,
one hour of laboratory. Prerequisites: Math. 20A-B-C
or 21C and Math. 20F, ECE 20A and 20B with grades of C–
or better.(F,W) R. Lugannani
60B. Circuits and Systems II (4)
Solution of network equations using Laplace transforms;
convolution integral; the concept of impedance;
Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems; transfer functions;
poles and zeros; two-port networks, steady state sinusoidal
response; Bode plots. Three hours of lecture, one
hour of discussion. Prerequisite: ECE 60A and Math. 21D
with grades of C– or better.(W,S) W. Ku
60L. Circuits and Systems Laboratory (4)
Essential aspects of electrical engineering. Topics covered
include transient and steady-state response of RLC
circuits, transistor circuits, operational amplifiers, nonlinear
circuit components, power supplies, digital circuits
and error analysis. The material complements the
topics in ECE 60A and 60B. One and a half hours of lecture,
three and a half hours of laboratory. (Lab fee: $15)
Prerequisites: ECE 20A-B, ECE 60A with grades of C– or better.
ECE 60B must be taken concurrently. (S) F. Najmabadi
90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
This seminar class will provide a broad review of current
research topics in both electrical engineering and computer
engineering. Typical subject areas are signal processing,
VLSI design, electronic materials and devices,
14
radio astronomy, communications, and optical computing.
One hour lecture. Prerequisite: none. (F,W,S)
UPPER-DIVISION
101. Linear Systems Fundamentals (4)
Complex variables. Singularities and residues. Signal
and system analysis in continuous and discrete time.
Fourier series and transforms. Laplace and z-transforms.
Linear Time Invariant Systems. Impulse response, frequency
response, and transfer functions. Poles and
zeros. Stability. Convolution. Sampling. Aliasing. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion. Prerequisites:
Math. 20A-B-C or 21C, 20D or 21D, 20F, ECE 60B and 60L or
ECE 53A and 53B with grades of C– or better. (F,W) K.
Zeger, P. Siegel
102. Introduction to Active Circuit Design (4)
Nonlinear active circuits design. Nonlinear device models
for diodes, bipolar and field-effect transistors.
Linearization of device models and small signal equivalent
circuits. Circuit designs will be simulated by computer
and tested in the laboratory.Three hours of lecture,
one hour discussion, three hours of laboratory. (Lab fee:
$15) Prerequisites: Math. 20A-B-C or 21C, 20D or 21D, 20F,
Phys. 2A-B or 4A-C, ECE 60B and 60L or ECE 53A and 53B
with grades of C– or better. (F,W) W. Coles, L. Larson
103. Fundamentals of Devices and Materials (4)
Introduction to semiconductor materials and devices.
Semiconductor crystal structure, energy bands, doping,
carrier statistics, drift and diffusion. p-n junctions,
metal-semiconductor junctions. Bipolar junction transistors:
current flow, amplification, switching, non-ideal
behavior. Metal-oxide-semiconductor structures,
MOSFETs, device scaling. Three hours of lecture, one
hour of discussion. Prerequisites: Math. 20A-B-C or 21C,
20D or 21D, 20E, 20F, Phys. 2A-D or 4A-E, ECE 60B and 60L
or ECE 53A and 53B with grades of C– or better. (F,W) E.Yu,
H-L Luo
107. Electromagnetism (4)
Electrostatics and magnetostatics; electrodynamics;
Maxwell’s equations; plane waves; skin effect.
Electromagnetics of transmission lines: reflection and
transmission at discontinuities, Smith chart, pulse propagation,
dispersion. Rectangular waveguides. Dielectric
and magnetic properties of materials. Electromagnetics
of circuits. Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion.
Prerequisites: Math. 20A-B-C or 21C, 20D or 21D, 20E,
20F, Phys. 2A-C or 4A-D, ECE 60B and 60L or ECE 53A and
53B with grades of C– or better. (W,S) K. Quest, N. Bertram
108. Digital Circuits (4)
Digital integrated electronic circuits for processing
technologies. Analytical methods for static and
dynamic characteristics. MOS field-effect transistors
and bipolar junction transistors, circuits for logic gates,
flip-flop, data paths, programmable logic arrays, memory
elements. Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion,
three hours of laboratory. (Lab fee: $20)
Prerequisites: ECE 102, ECE 30 or CSE 30 with grades of C–
or better. (W,S) S. Esener, P. Chau
109. Engineering Probability and Statistics (4)
Axioms of probability, conditional probability, theorem
of total probability, random variables, densities,
expected values, characteristic functions, transformation
of random variables, central limit theorem.
Random number generation, engineering reliability,
elements of estimation, random sampling, sampling
distributions, tests for hypothesis. Three hours of lecture,
one hour of discussion. Prerequisites: Math. 20A-B-C
or 21C, 20D or 21D, 20F, with grades of C– or better. (ECE
101 recommended). (W,S) A. Acampora, R. Rao
111. Advanced Digital Design Project (4)
Advanced topics in digital circuits and systems. Use of
computers and design automation tools. Hazard elimination,
synchronous/asnychronous FSM synthesis, synchronization
and arbitration, pipelining and timing
issues. Problem sets and design exercises. A large-scale
design project. Simulation and/or rapid prototyping.
Prerequisite: ECE 108 or CSE 140 with grades of C– or better.
(F) K. Yun, B. Lin
118. Computer Interfacing (4)
Interfacing computers and embedded controllers to
the real world: busses, interrupts, DMA, memory mapping,
concurrency, digital I/O, standards for serial and
parallel communications, A/D, D/A, sensors, signal conditioning,
video, and closed loop control. Students
design and construct an interfacing project. Three
hours of lecture, four hours of laboratory. (Lab fee: $20)
Prerequisites: ECE 30 or CSE 30 and ECE 60A-B-L or ECE
53A-B.(S) C. Guest
120. Solar System Physics (4)
General introduction to planetary bodies, the overall
structure of the solar system, and space plasma physics.
Course emphasis will be on the solar atmosphere, how
the solar wind is produced, and its interaction with both
magnetized and unmagnitized planets (and comets).
Three hours of lecture, four hours of laboratory.
Prerequisites: Phys. 2A-C or 4A-D, Math. 20A-B, 20C or 21C
with grades of C- or better. (S) N. Omidi
123. Antenna Systems Engineering (4)
The electromagnetic and systems engineering of radio
antennas for terrestrial wireless and satellite communications.
Antenna impedance, beam pattern, gain, and
polarization. Dipoles, monopoles, paraboloids, phased
arrays. Power and noise budgets for communication
links. Atmospheric propagation and multipath. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion. Prerequisite:
ECE 107 with a grade of C– or better. (F) B. Rickett
134. Electronic Materials Science of Integrated
Circuits (4)
Electronic materials science with emphasis on topics
pertinent to microelectronics and VLSI technology.
Concept of the course is to use components in integrated
circuits to discuss structure, thermodynamics,
reaction kinetics, and electrical properties of materials.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: Phys. 2C-D with
grades of C– or better. (S) E. Yu
135A. Semiconductor Physics (4)
Crystal structure and quantum theory of solids; electronic
band structure; review of carrier statistics, drift
and diffusion, p-n junctions; nonequilibrium carriers,
imrefs, traps, recombination, etc; metal-semiconductor
junctions and heterojunctions. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 103 with a grade of C– or better. (F) H. L.
Luo
135B. Electronic Devices (4)
Structure and operation of bipolar junction transistors,
junction field-effect transistors, metal-oxide-semiconductor
diodes and transistors. Analysis of dc and ac
characteristics. Charge control model of dynamic
behavior. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 135A
with a grade of C– or better. (W) H. L. Luo
136. Fundamentals of Semiconductor Device
Fabrication (4)
Crystal growth, controlled diffusion, determination of
junction-depth and impurity profile, epitaxy, ionimplantation,
oxidation, lithography, chemical vapor
deposition, etching, process simulation and robust
design for fabrication. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
ECE 103 with a grade of C– or better. (S) P.Yu, E.Yu
136L. Microelectronics Laboratory (4)
Laboratory fabrication of diodes and field effect transistors
covering photolithography, oxidation, diffusion,
thin film deposition, etching and evaluation of devices.
Two hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory. (Lab fee:
$35) Prerequisite: ECE 103 with a grade of C– or better.
(F,S) S. S. Lau
138L. Microstructuring Processing Technology
Laboratory (4)
A laboratory course covering the concept and practice
of microstructuring science and technology in fabricating
devices relevant to sensors, lab-chips and related
devices. Three hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory.
(Lab fee: $40) Prerequisite: upper-division standing
for science and engineering students. (W) S. S. Lau and
Yu-Hwa Lo
139. Semiconductor Device Design and Modeling (4)
Device physics of modern field effect transistors and
bipolar transistors, including behavior of submicron
structures. Relationship between structure and circuit
models of transistors. CMOS and BiCMOS technologies.
Emphasis on computer simulation of transistor operation
and application in integrated circuits. Three hours
of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 135A-B with grades of C– or
better. (W) P. Asbeck
145AL-BL-CL. Acoustics Laboratory (4-4-4)
Automated laboratory based on H-P GPIB controlled
instruments. Software controlled data collection and
analysis. Vibrations and waves in strings and bars of
electromechanical systems and transducers. Transmissions,
reflection, and scattering of sound waves in air
and water. Aural and visual detection. Two hours of lecture,
four hours lab. Prerequisite: ECE 107 with a grade of
C– or better or consent of instructor. (F-W-S) J. Hildebrand
146. Introduction to Magnetic Recording (4)
A laboratory introduction to the writing and reading of
digital information in a disk drive. Basic magnetic
recording measurements on state-of-art disk drives to
evaluate signals, noise, erasure, and non-linearities that
characterize this channel. Lectures on the recording
process will allow comparison of measurements with
basic voltage expressions. E/M FEM software utilized to
study geometric effects on the record and play transducers.
One hour of lecture, three hours of laboratory.
Prerequisite: ECE 107 with a grade of C– or better. (W) N.
Bertram
153. Probability and Random Processes for
Engineers (4)
Random processes. Stationary processes: correlation,
power spectral density. Gaussian processes and linear
transformation of Gaussian processes. Point processes.
Random noise in linear systems. Three hours of lecture,
one hour of discussion.Prerequisite: ECE 109 with a grade
of C– or better. (F,S) R. Rao
154A. Communications Systems I (4)
Study of analog modulation systems including AM, SSB,
DSB, VSB, FM, and PM. Performance analysis of both
coherent and noncoherent receivers, including threshold
effects in FM.Three hours of lecture, one hour of dis-
15
cussion. Prerequisite: ECE 153 with a grade of C– or better.
(F) L. Milstein
154B. Communications Systems II (4)
Design and performance analysis of digital modulation
techniques, including probability of error results for
PSK, DPSK, and FSK. Introduction to effects of intersymbol
interference and fading. Detection and estimation
theory, including optimal receiver design and maximum-likelihood
parameter estimation. Three hours of
lecture, one hour of discussion. Prerequisite: ECE 154A
with a grade of C– or better. (W) L. Milstein
154C. Communications Systems III (4)
Introduction to information theory and coding, including
entropy, average mutual information, channel
capacity, block codes and convolutional codes. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion. Prerequisite:
ECE 154B with a grade of C– or better. (S) L. Milstein
155A. Digital Recording Systems (4)
This course will be concerned with modulation and
coding techniques for digital recording channels.Three
hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 109 and 153 with
grades of C– or better and concurrent registration in ECE
154A required. Department stamp required.(F) J. Wolf
155B-C. Digital Recording Projects (4-4)
These courses will be concerned with modulation and
coding techniques for digital recording channels. In
winter and spring quarters, students will perform
experiments and/or computer simulations. One hour
lecture, four hours of laboratory. Prerequisites: ECE 109
and 153 with grades of C– or better and concurrent registration
in ECE 154B-C required. Department stamp
required.(W,S) J. Wolf
158A. Data Networks I (4)
Layered network architectures, data link control protocols
and multiple-access systems, performance analysis.
Flow control; prevention of deadlock and
throughput degradation. Routing, centralized and
decentralized schemes, static dynamic algorithms.
Shortest path and minimum average delay algorithms.
Comparisons.Three hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory.
Prerequisite: ECE 109 with a grade of C– or better.
ECE 159A recommended.(W) R. Rao
158B. Data Networks II (4)
Layered network architectures, data link control protocols
and multiple-access systems, performance analysis.
Flow control; prevention of deadlock and
throughput degradation. Routing, centralized and
decentralized schemes, static dynamic algorithms.
Shortest path and minimum average delay algorithms.
Comparisons.Three hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory.
Prerequisite: ECE 158A with a grade of C– or better.
(S) R. Cruz
159A. Queuing Systems: Fundamentals (4)
Analysis of single and multiserver queuing systems;
queue size and waiting times. Modeling of telephone
systems, interactive computer systems and the
machine repair problems. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 109 with a grade of C– or better. (F) E.
Masry
159B. Queuing Systems: Computer Systems
Performance (4)
Computer systems applications; priority scheduling,
time-sharing scheduling, modeling and performance of
interactive multiprogrammed computer systems, a
case study.Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 159A
with a grade of C– or better. (W) E. Masry
159C. Queuing Systems: Networks & Operation Research
Applications (4)
(Not offered 2001/2002.) Elements of computer-communication
networks; delay analysis, capacity, and flow
assignments. Operation research applications, cost
models and optimization, a case study, introduction to
inventory systems. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
ECE 159B with a grade of C– or better. (S) E. Masry
161A. Introduction to Digital Signal Processing (4)
Review of discrete-time systems and signals, DiscreteTime
Fourier Transform and its properties, the Fast
Fourier Transform, design of Finite Impulse Response
(FIR) and Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filters, implementation
of digital filters. Three hours of lecture, one
hour of discussion. Prerequisite: ECE 101 and 109 with
grades of C– or better. (F,S) W. Hodgkiss, B. Rao
161B. Digital Signal Processing I (4)
Sampling and quantization of baseband signals; A/D
and D/A conversion, quantization noise, oversampling
and noise shaping. Sampling of bandpass signals,
undersampling downconversion, and Hilbert transforms.
Coefficient quantization, roundoff noise, limit
cycles and overflow oscillations. Insensitive filter structures,
lattice and wave digital filters. Systems will be
designed and tested with Matlab, implemented with
DSP procesors and tested in the laboratory.Three hours
of lecture, one hour of discussion, three hours of laboratory.
(Lab fee: $15) Prerequisite: ECE 161A with a grade
of C– or better. (W) W. Coles, P. Chau
161C. Digital Signal Processing II (4)
Basic principles of adaptive algorithms. Algorithms for
adaptive FIR (gradient, LMS, recursive techniques) and
adaptive IIR filtering. Implementation issues. Introduction
of fast transform algorithms (FFT, Winograd FFT,
number theoric transforms, DCT). Fast convolution and
correlation Algorithms simulated by MATLAB. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, three hours of
laboratory. (Lab fee: $15) Prerequisite: ECE 161B with a
grade of C– or better. (S) P. Chau
163. Electronic Circuits and Systems (4)
Analysis and design of analog circuits and systems.
Feedback systems with applications to operational
amplifier circuits. Stability, sensitivity, bandwidth, compensation.
Design of active filters. Switched capacitor
circuits. Phase-locked loops. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog
conversion. Three hours of lecture, one
hour of discussion, three hours of laboratory. (Lab fee:
$10) Prerequisites: ECE 101 and 102 with grades of C– or
better. (S) W. Coles
164. Analog Integrated Circuit Design (4)
Design of linear and non-linear analog integrated circuits
including operational amplifiers, voltage regulators,
drivers, power stages, oscillators, and multipliers.
Use of feedback and evaluation of noise performance.
Parasitic effects of integrated circuit technology.
Laboratory simulation and testing of circuits. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, three hours of
laboratory.Prerequisite: ECE 102 with a grade of C– or better.
ECE 163 recommended. (F) I. Galton
165. Digital Integrated Circuit Design (4)
VLSI digital systems. Circuit characterization, performance
estimation, and optimization. Circuits for alternative
logic styles and clocking schemes. Subsystems
include ALUs, memory, processor arrays, and PLAs.
Techniques for gate arrays, standard cell, and custom
design. Design and simulation using CAD tools.
(Students who have taken CSE 143 may not take ECE
165 for credit.) Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion,
three hours of laboratory. (Lab fee: $10)
Prerequisite: ECE 108 with a grade of C– or better. (W) P.
Chau
166. Microwave Systems and Circuits (4)
Waves, distributed circuits, and scattering matrixmethods.
Passive microwave elements. Impedance matching.
Detection and frequency conversion using
microwave diodes. Design of transistor amplifiers
including noise performance. Circuits designs will be
simulated by computer and tested in the laboratory.
Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, three
hours of laboratory. Prerequisites: ECE 102 and 107 with
grades of C– or better. (S) P. Asbeck
171A. Linear Control System Theory (4)
Stability of continous- and discrete-time singleinput/single-output
linear time-invariant control systems
emphasizing frequency domain methods.
Transient and steady-state behavior. Stability analysis
by root locus, Bode, Nyquist, and Nichols plots.
Compensator design. Three hours of lecture, one hour
of discussion. Prerequisite: ECE 60B or ECE 53-54 or MAE
140 with a grade of C– or better. (S) D. Sworder
171B. Linear Control System Theory (4)
Time-domain, state-variable formulation of the control
problem for both discrete-time and continous-time linear
systems. State-space realizations from transfer function
system description. Internal and input-output
stability, controllability/observability, minimal realizations,
and pole-placement by full-state feedback. Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion. Prerequisite:
ECE 171A with a grade of C– or better.(F) D. Sworder
172A. Introduction to Intelligent Systems: Robotics and
Machine Intelligence (4)
This course will introduce basic concepts in machine
perception.Topics covered will include: edge detection,
segmentation, texture analysis, image registration, and
compression. Prerequisite: ECE 101 with a grade of C– or
better, ECE 109 recommended. (F) M. Trivedi
173. Theory and Applications of Neural Networks and
Fuzzy Logic (4)
Theory of fuzzy logic, reasoning and control; mathematical
aspects of neural architectures for pattern classification,
functional approximation, and adaptive
estimation and control; theory of computer-assisted
learning (supervised, unsupervised and hybrid); theory
and practice of recurrent networks (stability, placement
of equilibria); computer-aided design of fuzzy and neural
systems, Bayes and minimax design. Four hours of
lecture. Prerequisite: Math. 20F with a grade of C– or better.
(S) A. Sebald
174. Introduction to Linear and Nonlinear Optimization
with Applications (4)
The linear least squares problem, including constrained
and unconstrained quadratic optimization and the relationship
to the geometry of linear transformations.
Introduction to nonlinear optimization. Applications to
signal processing, system identification, robotics, and
circuit design. Four hours of lecture. Prerequisite: Math.
20F with a grade of C– or better. (S) B. Rao
175. Elements of Machine Intelligence: Pattern
Recognition and Machine Learning (
16
181. Geometrical Optics and Guided-wave Optics (4)
Electromagnetic optics, reflection, refraction, and stratified
media. Geometrical optics, ray tracing, aberrations,
optical elements, and optical system design. Optical
instruments, photometry, radiometry, and interferometers.
Resonators, guided-wave and fiber optics. Labs: ray
tracing, interferometry, guided-wave and fiberoptics.
Three hours of lecture, two hours of demonstration laboratory.
(Lab fee: $35) Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with
grades of C– or better. (S) C. Guest
182. Physical Optics and Fourier Optics (4)
Diffraction: Kirchoff, Fraunhofer, and Fresnel. Fourier
and Fresnel Transform optics and optical information
processing. Holography, Gaussian beams, coherence,
statistical optics and photon optics. Polarization and
crystal optics. Labs: diffraction, Fourier and Fresnel
Transforms, coherence. Three hours of lecture, two
hours of demonstration laboratory. (Lab fee: $35)
Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with grades of C– or better.
(F) S. Lee and S. Fainman
183. Optical Electronics (4)
Quantum electronics, interaction of light and matter
in atomic systems, semiconductors. Laser amplifiers
and laser systems. Photodetection. Electrooptics and
acoustooptics, photonic switching. Fiber optic communication
systems. Labs: semiconductor lasers, semiconductor
photodetectors. Three hours of lecture, two
hours of demonstration laboratory. (Lab fee: $35)
Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with grades of C– or better.
(S) C. Tu
184. Optical Information Processing and
Holography (4)
Labs: optical holography, photorefractive effect, spatial
filtering, computer generated holography. Two and a
half hours of lecture, four hours of laboratory. (Lab fee:
$35) Prerequisite: ECE 182 with a grade of C– or better. (W)
S. Fainman and S. Lee
185. Lasers and Modulators (4)
Labs: CO2 laser, HeNe laser, electrooptic modulation,
acoustooptic modulation, spatial light modulators. Two
and a half hours of lecture, four hours of laboratory. (Lab
fee: $35) Prerequisite: ECE 183 with a grade of C– or better.
(S) S. Lee and S. Fainman
187. Introduction to Biomedical Imaging and
Sensing (4)
Image processing fundamentals: imaging theory, image
processing, pattern recognition; digital radiography,
computerized tomography, nuclear medicine imaging,
nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound imaging,
microscopy imaging. Three hours of lecture, four
hours of laboratory. Prerequisite: Math. 20A-B-F, 20C or
21C, 20D or 21D, Phys. 2A-D, ECE 101 (may be taken concurrently)
with grades of C– or better. (F) S. Fainman
191. Engineering Group Design Project (4)
Groups of students work to design, build, demonstrate,
and document an engineering project. All students
give weekly progress reports of their tasks and contribute
a section to the final project report.Two hours of
discussion, eight hours of laboratory. Prerequisites:
Completion of all of the breadth courses and one depth
course. (W) C. Guest
192. Engineering Design (4)
Students complete a project comprising at least 50
percent or more engineering design to satisfy the
following features: student creativity, open-ended formulation
of a problem statement/specifications, consideration
of alternative solutions/realistic constraints.
Written final report required. Prerequisites: Students
enrolling in this course must have completed all of the
breadth courses and one depth course. The department
stamp is required to enroll in ECE 192.(Specifications and
enrollment forms are available in the undergraduate
office.)
193H. Honors Project (4-8)
An advanced reading or research project performed
under the direction of an ECE faculty member. Must
contain enough design to satisfy the ECE program’s
four-unit design requirement. Must be taken for a letter
grade. May extend over two quarters with a grade
assigned at completion for both quarters. Prerequisite:
admission to the ECE departmental honors program.
195. Teaching (2 or 4)
Teaching and tutorial activities associated with courses
and seminars. Not more than four units of ECE 195 may
be used for satisfying graduation requirements. (P/NP
grades only.) Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent
of the department chair.
197. Field Study in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(4, 8, 12, or 16)
Directed study and research at laboratories and observatories
away from the campus. (P/NP grades only.)
Prerequisites: consent of instructor and approval of the
department.
198. Directed Group Study (2 or 4)
Topics in electrical and computer engineering whose
study involves reading and discussion by a small group
of students under direction of a faculty member. (P/NP
grades only.) Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
199. Independent Study for Undergraduates (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research by special arrangement
with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.)
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
GRADUATE
200. Research Conference (2)
Group discussion of research activities and progress of
group members. (S/U grades only.) Prerequisite: consent
of instructor.(F,W,S) Staff
210. Information Systems in Manufacturing (4)
Basic problem solving and search techniques.
Knowledge based and expert systems. Planning and
decision support systems. Fuzzy logic and neural nets.
Topics covered will include data models, query processing,
distributed systems, enterprise computing and
intelligent agents, fuzzy logic, neural nets. Four hours of
lecture. Prerequisite: basic engineering and introduction
to computers.(W) R. Jain
211. Manufacturing Engineering Seminar and
Laboratory (2)
Combination of seminars, laboratory activities, and field
trips. Seminars by top manufacturing engineers, managers,
and student interns.Visits to manufacturing facilities.
Techniques in accessing international technical
and patent databases. Prerequisite: none. M. Trivedi
220. Space Plasma Physics (4)
The nature of the solar wind interaction with different
planets and comets leads to a variety of magnetospheres.
This course will deal with both nature of the
solar wind as well as these interactions. Three hours of
lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 107 or equivalent or consent of
instructor.(W) A. Mendis
222A-B-C. Applied Electromagnetic Theory (4)
Electrostatics and dielectric materials. Uniqueness, reciprocity,
and Poynting theorems. Solutions to Maxwell’s
equations in rectangular, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates.
Waves in isotropic and anisotropic media,
transmission lines, wave-guides, optical fibers, and resonant
structures. Radiation, propagation, and scattering
problems. Scattering matrices, microwave circuits, and
antennas. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 107,
123, 124 or equivalent.(F,W,S) B. Rickett
230A. Solid State Electronics (4)
This course is designed to provide a general background
in solid state electronic materials and devices.
Course content emphasizes the fundamental and current
issues of semiconductor physics related to the ECE
solid state electronics sequences. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisites: fundamentals of quantum mechanics,
ECE 135A-B, or equivalent. (F) S.S. Lau
230B. Solid State Electronics (4)
Physics of solid-state electronic devices, including p-n
diodes, Schottky diodes, field-effect transistors, bipolar
transistors, pnpn structures. Computer simulation of
devices, scaling characteristics, high frequency performance,
and circuit models. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 230A.(W) P. Asbeck
230C. Solid State Electronics (4)
This course is designed to provide a treatise of semiconductor
devices based on solid state phenomena.
Band structures carrier scattering and recombination
processes and their influence on transport properties
will be emphasized. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
ECE 230A or equivalent.(S) P. Yu
230E. Introduction to Superconductivity (4)
Superconductivity phenomenon, two-fluid models and
phenomenological theories, magnetic properties of
ideal superconductors, type II superconductors, tunneling,
microscopic theory, superconducting materials,
current developments. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. (F) H-L. Luo
231. Thin Film Phenomena (4)
This course is designed to provide a general survey of
thin film processes pertinent to microelectronics.Topics
to be discussed include preparation methods, various
modern analytical techniques, physical properties,
growth morphology, interface reaction, and alloy formation
and applications. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. (W) S.S. Lau and HL.Luo
232. The Field Effect and Field Effect Transistors (4)
Physics of the field effect of elemental and III-V compound
semiconductors related to the technology and
characteristics of Schottky barrier gate, insulated gate,
and junction gate field effect transistors.Three hours of
lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. (S) H. Wieder
233. X-Ray Diffraction Analysis of Materials (4)
This class will cover the physics of x-ray diffraction and
its application to the analysis of crystal structure, grain
size, grain orientation, surface roughness, epitaxy, film
thickness, etc. Experimental techniques to be discussed
and will include theta-2theta diffractometry, high resolution
x-ray rocking curves, Laue patterns, pole figures,
reflectivity, small angle scattering, laboratory experiments,
and computer simulations. Three hours of lecture,
one hour of laboratory. Prerequisite: consent of
instructor. (S) K. Kavanagh
17
234A. Imperfections in Solids (4)
Point, line, and planar defects in crystalline solids,
including vacancies, self-interstitials, solute atoms, dislocation
interactions, stacking faults, grain boundaries,
and their effects on the properties of solids. Hardening
by localized obstacles, precipitates, and dispersoids.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
(F) R.A. Asaro
234B. Advanced Study of Defects in Solids (4)
Advanced topics in dislocation theory and dislocation
dynamics. Defects and defects interactions. Atomistic
and subatomistic effects. Physical models based on
microscopic considerations. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 234A or consent of instructor. (W) R.A.
Asaro
236A. Semiconductor Heterostructure Materials (4)
This course covers the growth, characterization, and
heterojunction properties of III-IV compound semiconductors
and group-IV semiconductor heterostructures
for the subsequent courses on electronic and photonic
device applications. Topics include epitaxial growth
techniques, electrical properties of heterojunctions,
transport and optical properties of quantum wells and
superlattices. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE
230A-B-C or consent of instructor.(F) C. Tu
236B. Optical Processes in Semiconductors (4)
Absorption and emission of radiation in semiconductors.
Radiative transition and nonradiative recombination.
Ultra-fast optical phenomena. Laser and
photodetector devices will be emphasized.Three hours
of lecture.Prerequisites: ECE 230A and 230C or equivalent.
(W) P. Yu
236C. Heterojunction Field Effect Transistors (4)
Device physics and applications of isotype and anisotype
heterojunctions and quantum wells, including
band-edge discontinuities, band bending and space
charge layers at heterojunction interfaces, charge transport
normal and parallel to such interfaces, two-dimensional
electron gas structures, modulation doping,
heterojunction and insulated gate field effect transistors.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of
instructor.(S) H. Wieder
236D. Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors (4)
Current flow and charge storage in bipolar transistors.
Use of heterojunctions to improve bipolar structures.
Transient electron velocity overshoot. Simulation of
device characteristics. Circuit models of HBTs.
Requirements for high-speed circuit applications.
Elements of bipolar process technology, with emphasis
on III-V materials. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
consent of instructor. (F) P. Asbeck
237. Modern Materials Analysis (4)
Analysis of the near surface of materials via ion, electron,
and x-ray spectroscopes. Topics to be covered
include particle solid interactions. Rutherford backscattering,
secondary ion mass spectroscopy, electron
energy loss spectroscopy, particle induced x-ray emission,
Auger electron spectroscopy, extended z-ray
absorption, fine structure and channeling. Three hours
of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.(F) Staff
238A. Thermodynamics of Solids (4)
The thermodynamics and statistical mechanics of
solids. Basic concepts, equilibrium properties of alloy
systems, thermodynamic information from phase diagrams,
surfaces and interfaces, crystalline defects.
Multiple listed with Materials Science 201A.Three hours
of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. (F) Staff
238B. Solid State Diffusion and Reaction Kinetics (4)
Thermally activated processes. Boltzman factor, homogeneous
and heterogeneous reactions, solid state diffusion,
Fick’s law, diffusion mechanisms, Kirkendall
effects, Boltzmann-Manato analysis, high diffusivity
paths. Multiple listed with Materials Science 201B.Three
hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 238A.(W) Staff
239. Nanometer-Scale Probes and Devices (4)
Discussion of scanning tunneling microscopy, atomic
force microscopy, and other high-resolution scanning
probe techniques, including basic concepts, experimental
considerations, and applications. Fabrication
and properties of submicron structures, with emphasis
on the study of semiconductor materials and devices.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
(F) Edward T. Yu
240A. Lasers and Optics (4)
Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction theory. Optical resonators,
interferometry. Gaussian beam propagation
and transformation. Laser oscillation and amplification,
Q-switching and mode locking of lasers, some specific
laser systems. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE
123, 124 or equivalent; introductory quantum mechanics
or ECE183. (F), P. Yu
240B. Optical Information Processing (4)
Space-bandwidth product, superresolution, space-variant
optical system, partial coherence, image processing
with coherent and incoherent light, processing with
feedback, real-time light modulators for hybrid processing,
nonlinear processing. Optical computing and other
applications.Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 182
or equivalent.(W) S. Lee and S. Fainman
240C. Optical Modulation and Detection (4)
Propagation of waves and rays in anisotropic media.
Electro-optical switching and modulation. Acoustooptical
deflection and modulation. Detection theory.
Heterodyne detection, incoherent and coherent detection.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 181,183 or
equivalent. (S) S. Esener and P. Yu
241A. Nonlinear Optics (4)
Second harmonic generation (color conversion), parametric
amplification and oscillation, photorefractive
effects and four-wave mixing, optical bistability; applications.Three
hours of lecture.Prerequisites: ECE 240A, C,
or consent of instructor.(F) S.Fainman and S. Lee
241B. Optical Devices for Computing. (4)
Application of electro-optic, magneto-optic, acoustooptic,
and electro-absorption effects to the design of
photonic devices with emphasis on spatial light modulation
and optical storage techniques. Three hours of
lecture.Prerequisites: ECE 240A, C, or consent of instructor.
(F) S. Esener
241C. Holographic Optical Elements (4)
Fresnel, Fraunhofer, and Fourier holography. Analysis of
thin and volume holograms, reflection and transmission
holograms, color and polarization holograms.
Optically recorded and computer-generated holography.
Applications to information storage, optical interconnects,
2-D and 3-D display, pattern recognition, and
image processing. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
ECE 182 or equivalent, or consent of instructor. (W) S.
Fainman
241AL. Lasers and Holography Laboratory (2)
Laser resonator design, construction, alignment, characterizations.
Operation and evaluation of molecular,
gas, liquid dye, semiconductor lasers. Spatial and temporal
coherance measurements. Design and fabrication
of transmission, reflection, bleached, color, multiple
exposure holograms. Prerequisites: ECE 181,182,183 or
consent of instructor. (This course is cojoint with ECE 184.
Graduate students will choose 50 percent of the experiments
and receive two units of credit.) (F) S. Lee and S.
Fainman
241BL. Optical Signal Processing Laboratory (2)
Construction and characterization of Fourier/Fresnel
transform, coherent/incoherent, imaging-processing
systems. Design, coding, fabrication of spatial filters,
computer-generated holograms. Experiments in nonlinear
photorefractive phenomena and image-processing
applications. Construction of vector-matrix
multipliers. Optical systems design using Code-V.
Prerequisites: ECE 181, 182, 183, or consent of instructor.
(This course is cojoint with ECE 185. Graduate stduents will
choose 50 percent of the experiments and receive two
units of credit.) (W) S. Lee and S. Fainman
241CL. Optoelectronics and Communications
laboratory (2)
Operation and characterization of electro-optic,
acousto-optic modulators. Polarization manipulation
techniques. Heterodyne detection schemes. Parametrization
of P-I-N and avalanche detectors, LED
sources. Evaluation of optical fiber, thin film wave-guide
properties. Characterization of Hughes LCLV spatial
light modulator. Prerequisites: ECE 181, 182, 183, or consent
of instructor. Staff
242A. Optical Systems (4)
Principles of optical system design. Modeling of optical
and opto-electronic components, modules, and systems.
Signal integrity analysis. Design optimization
using CAD. Assembly and testing. System scalability
and manufacturability. Opto-electronic packaging.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 240A-B-C, or
consent of instructor.(W) S. Lee
244A. Statistical Optics (4)
Introduction to statistical phenomena in optics including
first order properties of light waves generated from
various sources. Coherence of optical waves, high-order
coherence. Partial coherence and its effects on imaging
systems. Imaging in presence of randomly inhomogeneous
medium. Limits in photelectric detection of light.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 240A-B or consent
of instructor. (F) Y. Fainman
244B. Quantum Electronics of Femtosecond Optical
Pulses (4)
Femtosecond optical pulses in linear dispersive media.
Self-action of optical pulses. Parametric interaction of
optical pulses. Self- and cross-phase modulation. Fast
phase control, compression and shaping of optical
pulses. Optical solitons. Applications of femtosecond
optical pulses. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE
240A-B-C or consent of instructor. (W) Y. Fainman
245A. Advanced Acoustics I (4)
Boundary value problems in vibrating systems, wave
propagation in strings, bars, and plates. Fundamentals
of acoustical transducers. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: concurrent registration in ECE 145AL recommended.
(F) J. Hildebrand
245B. Advanced Acoustics II (4)
Theory of radiation transmission and scattering of
sound with special application to ocean acoustics.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 245A or consent
of instructor. Concurrent registration in ECE 145BL recommended.
(W) J. Hildebrand
18
245C. Advanced Acoustics III (4)
Signal processing in underwater acoustics. Theory and
hardwave embodiments. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 245B or consent of instructor. Concurrent
registration in ECE 145CL recommended. (S) J. Hildebrand
246A. Materials for Magnetic Recording (4)
Properties of magnetic materials utilized as magnetic
recording media and heads; magnetic structure of
oxides and metals; fine particle magnetism: micromagnetic
analysis; hysteresis and reversal mechanisms of
hard materials; dynamic processes and domain patterns
of soft materials; thermal fluctuations; multilayer
phenomena: giant magnetoresistance. Prerequisites:
undergraduate electromagnetism and solid state physics
or consent of instructor. (alternate years) H.L. Luo, N.
Bertram
246B. Analysis of the Magnetic Recording Process (4)
In-depth analysis of the magnetic recording process.
Magnetic fields and Fourier transforms of fields and magnetized
media and heads; playback process for single and
multiple transitions. Reciprocity theorem for inductive and
magnetoresistive heads; record process modeling; interferences
and nonlinearities; medium noise mechanisms and
correlations; signal to noise ratios. Prerequisites: undergraduate
electromagnetic theory and mathematical methods or
consent of instructor. (alternate years) N.Bertram
246C. Magnetic Recording Laboratory (4)
Basic measurements in magnetic recording. Fields and
Fourier transforms of head structures using resistance
paper measurements and computer analysis; inductance
and B-H loop measurements of recording heads
and core materials; recording system calibration and
magnetization pattern investigation utilizing spectral
measurements (FFT). Prerequisites: ECE 246B and laboratory
experience.(alternate years) N. Bertram
250. Random Processes (4)
Random variables, probability distributions and densities,
characteristic functions. Convergence in probability
and in quadratic mean, Stochastic processes,
stationarity. Processes with orthogonal and independent
increments. Power spectrum and power spectral
density. Stochastic integrals and derivatives. Spectral
representation of wide sense stationary processes, harmonizable
processes, moving average representations.
Prerequisite: ECE 153 or equivalent or consent of instructor.(F)
R. Lugannani
251AN. Digital Signal Processing I (4)
Discrete random signals; conventional (FFT based)
spectral estimation. Coherence and transfer function
estimation; model-based spectral estimation; linear
prediction and AR modeling. Levinson-Durbin algorithm
and lattice filters, minimum variance spectrum
estimation. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: ECE 153
in addition to either ECE 161 or 161A, or consent of instructor.
(W) W. Hodgkiss and B. Rao
251BN. Digital Signal Processing II (4)
Adaptive filter theory, estimation errors for recursive
least squares and gradient algorithms, convergence
and tracking analysis of LMS, RLS, and Kalman filtering
algorithms, comparative performance of Weiner and
adaptive filters, transversal and lattice filter implementations,
performance analysis for equalization, noise
cancelling, and linear prediction applications. Three
hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 251AN.(S) W. Hodgkiss
and J. Zeidler
251CN. Filter Banks and Wavelets (4)
Fundamentals of multirate systems (noble identities,
polyphase representations), maximally decimated filter
banks (QMF filters for 2-channels, M-channel perfect
reconstruction systems), paraunitary perfect reconstruction
filter banks, the wavelet transform (multiresolution,
discrete wavelet transform, filter banks and
wavelet).Three hours of lecture.Prerequisite: ECE 161B or
equivalent.(F) B. Rao
251DN. Array Processing (4)
The coherent processing of data collected from sensors
distributed in space for signal enhancement and noise
rejection purposes or wavefield directionality estimation.
Conventional and adaptive beamforming. Matched
field processing. Sparse array design and processing
techniques. Applications to acoustics, geophysics, and
electromagnetics. Prerequisite: 251AN, ECE 161 or 151A
(ECE 161, 162A-B series recently renumbered to ECE
161A-B-C), or consent of instructor.(F) W. Hodgkiss
252A. Speech Compression (4)
Speech signals, production and perception, compression
theory, high rate compression using waveform
coding (PCM, DPCM, ADPCM, . .), DSP tools for low rate
coding, LPC vocoders, sinusoidal tranform coding,
multi-band coding, medium rate coding using code
excited linear prediction (CELP). Prerequisite: ECE 161A
or 161. (W) B. Rao
252B. Speech Recognition (4)
Signal analysis methods for recognition, dynamic time
warping, isolated word recognition, hidden markov
models, connectedword, and continuous speech recognition.
Prerequisites: ECE 109, ECE 262A. (S) B. Rao
253A. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing (4)
Image quantization and sampling, image transforms,
image enhancement, image compression. Prerequisites:
ECE 109, 153, ECE 161 or ECE 161A.(W) P. Cosman
253B. Digital Image Analysis (4)
Image morphology, edge detection, scene segmentation,
texture analysis, registration and fusion, feature
analysis, time-varying images. Prerequisite: ECE 253A or
consent of instructor. (S) P. Cosman
254. Detection Theory (4)
Hypothesis testing, detection of signals in white and
colored Gaussian noise; Karhunen-Loève expansion,
estimation of signal parameters, maximum-likelihood
detection; resolution of signals; detection and estimation
of stochastic signals; applications to radar, communications,
and optics. Prerequisite: ECE 153. (F) R.
Lugannani
255AN. Information Theory (4)
Introduction to basic concepts, source coding theorems,
capacity, noisy-channel coding theorem. Three
hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 154A-B-C or consent of
instructor. (F) Staff
255BN/CN. Source Coding I, II (4/4)
Theory and practice of lossy source coding, vector
quantization, predictive and differential encoding, universal
coding, source-channel coding, asymptotic theory,
speech and image applications. Three hours of
lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 250 and 259A or 259AN, or consent
of instructor. (W,S) K. Zeger
256A-B. Time Series Analysis and Applications (4-4)
Stationary processes; spectral representation; linear
transformation. Recursive and nonrecursive prediction
and filtering; Wiener-Hopf and Kalman-Bucy filters.
Series expansions and applications. Time series analysis;
probability density, covariance and spectral estimation.
Inference from sampled-data, sampling theorems;
equally and non-equally spaced data, applications to
detection and estimation problem.Prerequisite: ECE 153.
(F,W) E. Masry
257A. Multiuser Communication Systems (4)
M/G/1, G1/M/1 queues, imbedded chains. Ergodic theory
of Markov chains, classification, ergodic theorems.
Multiple access systems, random access protocols,
capacity, stability, delay and control, reservation and
hybrid schemes. Prerequisites: ECE 153 and 159A, or
equivalent. Note: ECE 159A is an integral part of this
course and should be taken in the fall quarter.(W) R. Rao
257B. Principles of Wireless Networks
19
260B. VLSI Integrated Circuits and Systems Design (4)
Computer arithmetic, control and memory structures
for VLSI implementations at logic, circuit, and layout
level. Computer-aided design and performance simulations,
actual design projects for teams of two to three
students per team. Layout done on CAD workstations
for project IC chip fabrication. Design projects will be
reviewed in class presentation. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: ECE 260A. (W) P. Chau
260C. VLSI Advanced Topics (4)
Advanced topics seminar with issues from system theory,
to new technologies, to alternative design methodologies
will be subject for review. Class discussion,
participation and presentations of projects and special
topics assignments will be emphasized. The testing
results of fabricated IC chips from other VLSI design
classes will be presented in class and in a final report.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: ECE 260B.(S) P. Chau
261A. Design of Analog and Digital GaAs Integrated
Circuits I (4)
Introduction to analytical and computer-aided design
(CAD) techniques for microwave integrated circuits.
Design of active two-ports using scattering parameters.
Monolithic realization of low-noise amplifiers using
GaAs FETs and HEMTs. Design of monolithic distributed
amplifiers. Design of monolithic power amplifiers and
mixers. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of
instructor.(W) W. Ku
261B. Design of Analog and Digital GaAs Integrated
Circuits (4)
Introduction to GaAs digital integrated circuits (IC).
Design of simple digital GaAs ICs using DCFL. Design of
digital building blocks for complex multipliers, FET butterfly
chips, DDS, and oversampled A/D converters.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
(S) W. Ku
262B. RPG of ASSPS (Rapid Prototyping and Generation
of Applications-Specific Signal Processing
Systems) (4)
Introduction to concurrent engineering which can only
be effectively treated through the employment of a
multiprocessing environment. Strategies for partitioning
of signal processing system designs and optimization
of scheduling of task assignments in a distributed
computing environment. Introduction to mixed-signal
systems and reduced complexity system design.
Testing of rapid prototyped ASICS. Three hours of lecture,
nine hours of laboratory. Prerequisite: ECE 262A. (S)
P.Chau
263A. Reliable Design of Digital Systems (4)
Fault tolerance and testability have the common objective
of improving the reliability of computer hardware.
Knowing the fault models, how faults manifest themselves,
how to test fault existence, and how to keep system
functioning when fault exists help the engineers
choose different techniques in computing and VLSI systems
designs. Prerequisite: completion of upper-division
ECE/CE courses or consent of instructor.(F) T. T. Lin
263B. Fault-Tolerant Computing and VLSI Testing I (4)
This course will cover all aspects of fault-tolerant computing
and VLSI testing. Topics include fundamental
concepts of fault-tolerant hardware design, test pattern
generation, signature analysis, system diagnosis and
evaluation, and fault tolerance in VLSI-based systems.
Prerequisite: ECE 263A or consent of instructor.(W) T.T. Lin
263C. Fault-Tolerant Computing and VLSI Testing II (4)
Fault tolerance and testability have the common objective
of improving system reliability. The second part of
the course emphasizes systemwide design issues.
Topics include fault-tolerant architecture and systems,
design for testability, and computer-aided reliability
evaluation. Current research issues in fault-tolerant
computing and VLSI testing will be addressed.
Prerequisites: ECE 263A-B or consent of instructor. (S) T. T.
Lin
264A. CMOS Analog Integrated Circuits and
Systems I (4)
Frequency response of the basic CMOS gain stage and
current mirror configurations. Advanced feedback and
stability analysis; compensation techniques. HighPerformance
CMOS amplifier topologies. Switched
capacitor circuits. Analysis of noise and distortion.Three
hours of lecture, three hours of laboratory. Prerequisites:
ECE 164 and 153 or equivalent courses.(W) I. Galton
264B. CMOS Analog Integrated Circuits and
Systems II (4)
Continuous-time filters: synthesis techniques and
CMOS circuit topologies. Switched-capacitor filters: synthesis
techniques and CMOS circuit topologies.
Overview of CMOS samplers, data converters, mixers,
modulators, oscillators, and PLLs.Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisites: ECE 264A and 251A or 251AN.(S) I. Galton
265A. Communication Circuit Design I (4)
Introduction to noise and linearity concepts. System
budgeting for optimum dynamic range. Frequency
plan tradeoffs. Linearity analysis techniques. Downconversion
and up-conversion techniques. Modulation
and de-modulation. Microwave and RF system design
communications. Current research topics in the field.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.(F)
L. Larson
265B. Communication Circuit Design II (4)
Radio frequency integrated circuits: impedance matching
concepts, low-noise amplifiers, AGCs. Mixers, filters.
Comparison between BJT, CMOS and GaAs technologies
for radio frequency and microwave applications.
Device modeling for radio frequency applications.
Design tradeoffs of linearity, noise, power dissipation,
and dynamic range. Current research topics in the field.
Three hours of lecture.Prerequisites: ECE 164 and 265A or
consent of instructor.(W) L. Larson
270A-B-C. Neurocomputing (4-4-4)
Neurocomputing is the study of nonalgorithmic information
processing. This three-quarter sequence covers
neurocomputing theory, design, and application,
including sensor processing, knowledge processing,
data analysis, and hands-on training with a neurocomputer.
Prerequisite: graduate standing in ECE or CSE, or
consent of instructor.(F,W,S) R. Hecht-Nielsen
272A. Stochastic Processes in Dynamic Systems (4)
(Not offered 2001/2002.) Diffusion equations, linear and
nonlinear estimation and detection, random fields,
optimization of stochastic dynamic systems, applications
of stochastic optimization to problems.
Prerequisites: ECE 250.(W,S) D. Sworder
273A-B-C. Optimization in Linear Vector Spaces (4-4-4)
(Not offered 2001/2002.) Hilbert spaces, Banach spaces,
projection theorem, dual spaces, Hahn Banach theorem,
hyperplanes, geometric form of H Banach theorem,
modern statistical optimization routines
(simulated annealing, evolutionary programming),
approaches to large neural net problems derived from
the physics literature (chaos, spin glass, basic statistical
mechanics). Prerequisites: ECE 174. ECE 273B requires
273A and 273C requires 273B. (F,W,S) A. Sebald
275A. Parameter Estimation I (4)
Linear last squares (batch, recursive, total, sparse, psuedoinverse,
QR, SVD); statistical figures of merit (bias,
consistency, Cramer-Rao lower-bound, efficiency); maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE); sufficient statistics;
algorithms for computing the MLE including the expectation
maximation (EM) algorithm. The problem of
missing information; the problem of outliers. Prerequisites:
ECE 109 and ECE 153 with grades of C– or better.
(F) K. Kreutz-Delgado
275B. Parameter Estimation II (4)
The Bayesian framework and the use of statistical priors;
sufficient statistics and reproducing probability distributions;
minimum mean square estimation (MSE);
linear minimum mean square estimation; maximum a
posteriori (MAP) estimation; minimax estimation;
Kalman filter and extended Kalman filter (EKF) BaumWelsh
algorithm; Viterbi algorithm. Applications to
identifying the parameters and states of hidden
Markov models (HMMs) including ARMA, state-space,
and finite-state dynamical systems. Applications to
parametric and non-parametric density estimation.
Prerequisites: ECE 153 and ECE 275A with grades of C– or
better. (W) K. Kreutz-Delgado
276A-B. Robot Kinematics, Dynamics, and Control (4-4)
Kinematics of rigid bodies and serial-chain manipulators.
The forward and inverse kinematics problem.
Sufficient conditions for exact solvability of the inverse
kinematics problem. Joint-space versus tank-space
control. Path/trajectory generation. Newton-Euler and
Lagrangian formulation of manipulatory dynamics.
Manipulability measures. Redundancy resolution by
subtask functional optimization and side-constraint
satisfaction. Pseudo-inverse kinematic control of redundant
manipulators. PID and feedback-linearizing trajectory
and force control. Issues in path planning and
compliant assembly. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisites: ECE 171A-B, ECE 174 must be completed
with grades of C– or better. (ECE 174 may be concurrent.)
(W-S) K. Kreutz-Delgado
280. Special Topics in Electronic Devices and
Materials (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in electronic devices and materials
will be presented by visiting or resident faculty
members. It will not be repeated so it may be taken for
credit more than once. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Staff
281. Special Topics in Radio and Space Science (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in radio and space science will
be presented by visiting or resident faculty members. It
will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit more
than once.Three hours of lecture.Prerequisite: consent of
instructor. Staff
282. Special Topics in Optoelectronics (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in optoelectronic materials,
devices, systems, and applications will be presented by
visiting or resident faculty members. It will not be
repeated so it may be taken for credit several times.
Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
Staff
20
283. Special Topics in Electronic Circuits and
Systems (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in electronic circuits and systems
will be presented by visiting or resident faculty
members. It will not be repeated so it may be taken for
credit more than once. Three hours of lecture.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Staff
284. Special Topics in Computer Engineering (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in computer engineering will
be presented by visiting or resident faculty members. It
will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit more
than once.Three hours of lecture.Prerequisite: consent of
instructor. Staff
285. Special Topics in Robotics and Control Systems (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in robotics and control systems
will be presented by visiting or resident faculty members.
It will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit
more than once. Three hours of lecture. Prerequisite:
consent of instructor. Staff
287A,B. Special Topics in Communication Theory and
Systems (4)
A course to be given at the discretion of the faculty at
which topics of interest in information science will be
presented by visiting or resident faculty members. It
will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit more
than once.Three hours of lecture.Prerequisite: consent of
instructor. Staff
288. Special Topics in Applied Physics (1-8)
Topics of interest in applied physics. Topics will vary
from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit not
more than three times.
290. Graduate Seminar on Current ECE Research (2)
Weekly discussion of current research conducted in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering by
the faculty members involved in the research projects.
Staff
292. Graduate Seminar in Radio and Space Science (2)
Research topics in radio astronomy, space plasmas, and
solar system physics. (S/U grades only.) B. Rickett
293. Graduate Seminar in Communication Theory and
Systems (2)
Weekly discussion of current research literature. Staff
294. Graduate Seminar in Applied Solid State Physics
(2)
Research topics in applied solid state physics and quantum
electronics. H-L. Luo
295. Graduate Seminar in Computer Engineering (2)
Biweekly discussion of research topics in computer
engineering. Computer engineering is currently the
most impacted field both in industry and academia.
Computer engineering is the science of searching for
an optimum within constraints of available methods
and resources. Three hours of seminar. Prerequisite: consent
of instructor.(F,W,S) T. T. Lin
296. Graduate Seminar in Optical Signal Processing (2)
Research topics of current interest in holography. S. Lee
298. Independent Study (1-16)
Open to properly qualified graduate students who wish
to pursue a problem through advanced study under
the direction of a member of the staff. (S/U grades only.)
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
299. Research (1-16)
(S/U grade only.)
501. Teaching (1-4)
Teaching and tutorial activities associated with courses
and seminars. Not required for candidates for the Ph.D.
degree. Number of units for credit depends on number
of hours devoted to class or section assistance. (S/U
grade only.) Prerequisite: consent of department chair