ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES IN
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
EE 14N. Things about Stuff
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
Most engineering curricula present truncated, linear histories of
technology, but the stories behind disruptive inventions such as the
telegraph, telephone, wireless, television, transistor, and chip are as
important as the inventions themselves. How these stories elucidate
broadly applicable scientific principles. Focus is on studying
consumer devices; optional projects to build devices including
semiconductors made from pocket change. Students may propose
topics of interest to them. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Lee, T)
EE 20N. Hacking Stuff
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
The design of a complete system by combining electrical engineering
disciplines such as control theory, circuit design, microprocessors,
and semiconductor devices. Based on radio-controlled toy
cars, the design and construction of a robot capable of autonomously
following a track. Teams compete in a race against the
clock in a version of the DARPA Grand Challenge. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Peumans, P)
EE 21N. What is Nanotechnology?
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
Possibilities and impossibilities of nanotechnology. Sources include
Feynman’s There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom, Drexler’s
Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology, and
Crichton’s Prey. Assumptions and predictions of these classic
works; what nano machinery may do; scenarios of a technology
that may go astray. Prerequisites: high school math, physics and
chemistry. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Wong, P)
EE 23N. Imaging: From the Atom to the Universe
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
Forms of imaging including human and animal vision systems,
atomic force microscope, microscope, digital camera, holography
and three-dimensional imaging, telescope, synthetic aperture radar
imaging, nuclear magnetic imaging, sonar and gravitational wave
imaging, and the Hubble Space telescope. Physical principles and
exposure to real imaging devices and systems. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Hesselink, L)
EE 24N. Incentive Mechanisms for Societal Networks
(F,Sem) Stanford Introductory Seminar. Preference to freshmen.
Examples of societal networks include: transportation networks;
electricity, water, and gas networks; recycling systems. The efficient
operation of such networks and their dependence on their use
of technology and on human actions.
3 units, Spr (Prabhakar, B)
EE 41. Physics of Electrical Engineering
How everything from electrostatics to quantum mechanics is used
in common high-technology products. Electrostatics are critical in
micro-mechanical systems used in many sensors and displays, and
basic EM waves are essential in all high-speed communication
systems. How to propagate energy in free space. Which aspects of
modern physics are needed to generate light for the operation of a
DVD player or TV. Introduction to semiconductors, solid-state
light bulbs, and laser pointers. Hands-on labs to connect physics to
everyday experience. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
5 units, Win (Solgaard, O)
EE 60N. Man versus Nature: Coping with Disasters Using
Space Technology
(F,Sem) (Same as GEOPHYS 60N) Stanford Introductory Semi528
| STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
nar. Preference to freshman. Natural hazards, earthquakes, volcanoes,
floods, hurricanes, and fires, and how they affect people and
society; great disasters such as asteroid impacts that periodically
obliterate many species of life. Scientific issues, political and social
consequences, costs of disaster mitigation, and how scientific
knowledge affects policy. How spaceborne imaging technology
makes it possible to respond quickly and mitigate consequences;
how it is applied to natural disasters; and remote sensing data manipulation
and analysis. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 100. The Electrical Engineering Profession
Lectures/discussions on topics of importance to the electrical engineering
professional. Continuing education, professional societies,
intellectual property and patents, ethics, entrepreneurial engineering,
and engineering management.
1 unit, Aut (Wong, S)
EE 101A. Circuits I
First of two-course sequence. Introduction to circuit modeling and
analysis. Topics include creating the models of typical components
in electronic circuits and simplifying non-linear models for restricted
ranges of operation (small signal model); and using network
theory to solve linear and non-linear circuits under static and
dynamic operations. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Wong, S)
EE 101B. Circuits II
Second of two-course sequence. MOS large-signal and smallsignal
models. MOS amplifier design including DC bias, small
signal performance, multistage amplifiers, frequency response, and
feedback. Prerequisite: 101A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Howe, R), Spr (Shenoy, K)
EE 102A. Signal Processing and Linear Systems I
Concepts and mathematical tools in continuous-time signal
processing and linear systems analysis, illustrated with examples
from signal processing, communications, and control. Mathematical
representation of signals and systems. Linearity and timeinvariance.
System impulse and step response. Frequency domain
representations: Fourier series and Fourier transforms. Filtering
and signal distortion. Time/frequency sampling and interpolation.
Stability and causality in linear systems. Laplace transforms and
Bode plots. Feedback and control system design. Applications
include radar, ultrasound imaging, fetal heart monitors, cell telephones,
magnetic resonance imaging, and array antennas. Prerequisite:
MATH 53 or ENGR 155A. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Pauly, J), Spr (Gray, R)
EE 102B. Signal Processing and Linear Systems II
Concepts and mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing
and linear systems analysis with examples from digital signal
processing, communications, and control. Discrete-time signal
models. Continuous-discrete-continuous signal conversion. Discrete-
time impulse and step response. Frequency domain representations:
Fourier series and transforms. Connection between continuous
and discrete time frequency representations. Discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT). Digital filter
and signal processing examples. Discrete-time and hybrid linear
systems. Stability and causality. Z transforms and their connection
to Laplace transforms. Frequency response of discrete-time systems.
Discrete-time control. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Aut (Shultz, K), Spr (Kahn, J), Sum (Shultz, K)
EE 106. Planetary Exploration
The other worlds of the solar system as revealed by their electromagnetic
emissions and recent space missions. Comparative properties
of the terrestrial and Jovian planets; planetary atmospheres,
surfaces, interiors, and rings; planetary and satellite orbits and
spacecraft trajectories; properties of interplanetary gas, dust, comets,
and meteorites. Blackbody radiation and the basis for global
warming. What the planets reveal about potential terrestrial catastrophes
such as runaway greenhouse effect or collision with an
asteroid or large comet. Origin and evolution of planetary systems.
Remote sensing from spacecraft at radio, infrared, light, and ultraviolet
wavelengths. Stanford EE department radio experiments.
Prerequisite: one year of college engineering. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 108A. Digital Systems I
Digital circuit, logic, and system design. Digital representation of
information. CMOS logic circuits. Combinational logic design.
Logic building blocks, idioms, and structured design. Sequential
logic design and timing analysis. Clocks and synchronization.
Finite state machines. Microcode control. Digital system design.
Control and datapath partitioning. Lab. Prerequisite: ENGR 40.
Corequisite for WIM: ENGR 102E. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Aut (Mitra, S), Win (Mitra, S)
EE 108B. Digital Systems II
The design of processor-based digital systems. Instruction sets,
addressing modes, data types. Assembly language programming,
low-level data structures, introduction to operating systems and
compilers. Processor microarchitecture, microprogramming, pipelining.
Memory systems and caches. Input/output, interrupts, buses
and DMA. System design implementation alternatives, software/
hardware tradeoffs. Labs involve the design of processor
subsystems and processor-based embedded systems. Prerequisite:
108A, CS 106B. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, Aut (Olukotun, O), Win (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 109. Digital Systems Design Lab
The design of integrated digital systems encompassing both customized
software and hardware. Software/hardware design tradeoffs.
Algorithm design for pipelining and parallelism. System
latency and throughput tradeoffs. FPGA optimization techniques.
Integration with external systems and smart devices. Firmware
configuration and embedded system considerations. Enrollment
limited to 25; preference to graduating seniors. Prerequisites:
108B, and CS 106B or X. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Weaver, J)
EE 114. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Analysis and simulation of elementary transistor stages, current
mirrors, supply- and temperature-independent bias, and reference
circuits. Integrated circuit technologies, circuit components, component
variations, and practical design paradigms. Performance
evaluation using computer-aided design tools. Prerequisite:
101B.GER:DB-EngrAppSci GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Dutton, R)
EE 116. Semiconductor Device Physics
The fundamental operation of semiconductor devices and overview
of applications. The physical principles of semiconductors, both
silicon and compound materials; operating principles and device
equations for junction devices (diodes, bipolar transistor, photodetectors).
Introduction to quantum effects and band theory of
solids. Prerequisite: ENGR 40. Corequisite: 101B. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Peumans, P)
EE 118. Introduction to Mechatronics
Technologies involved in mechatronics (intelligent electromechanical
systems) and techniques to integrate these technologies
into mechatronic systems. Topics: electronics (A/D, D/A converters,
op-amps, filters, power devices); software program design
(event-driven programming, state machine based design); DC and
stepper motors; basic sensing; mechanical design (machine elements
and mechanical CAD). Lab component of structured assignments
combined with large, open-ended team project. Limited
enrollment. Prerequisites: ENGR 40, and CS 106A or 106X (preferred).
4 units, not given this year
EE 122A. Analog Circuits Laboratory
Practical applications of analog circuits, including simple amplifiers,
filters, oscillators, power supplies, and sensors. Design skills,
computer-aided design, and circuit fabrication and debugging. The
design process through proposing, designing, simulating, building,
debugging, and demonstrating a project. Radio frequency and
largely digital projects not suitable for EE 122. Prerequisite:
ENGR 40 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 122B. Introduction to Biomedical Electronics
Key components of modern systems, their application in physiology
measurements, and reduction to practice in labs. Fundamentals
of analog/digital conversion and filtering techniques for biosignals,
typical transducers (biopotential, electrochemical, temperature,
pressure, acoustic, movement), and interfacing circuits. Issues of
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10 | 529
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
biomedical electronics (safety, isolation, noise). Prerequisite:
EE122A
3 units, Spr (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 124. Introduction to Neuroelectrical Engineering
Fundamental properties of electrical activity in neurons, technology
for measuring and altering neural activity, and operating principles
of modern neurological and neural prosthetic medical systems.
Topics: action potential generation and propagation, neuro-
MEMS and measurement systems, experimental design and statistical
data analysis, information encoding and decoding, clinical
diagnostic systems, and fully-implantable neural prosthetic systems
design.
3 units, Win (Shenoy, K)
EE 133. Analog Communications Design Laboratory
Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude modulation (AM)
using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation (FM) based on
discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits such as voltage-
controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop (PLL) techniques,
characterization of key parameters, and their applications.
Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs involve building
and characterization of AM and FM modulation/demodulation
circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited to 30 undergraduates
and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: 101B. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 134. Introduction to Photonics
Photonics, optical sensors, and fiber optics. Conceptual and mathematical
tools for design and analysis of optical communication
and sensor systems. Experimental characterization of semiconductor
lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber
optic links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Class project
aimed on confocal microscopy for biomedical applications. Laboratory
experiments. Prerequisite: 41 or equivalent. GER:DBEngrAppSci
4 units, Spr (Solgaard, O)
EE 136. Introduction to Nanophotonics and Nanostructures
Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors.
Confining these waves, and devices employing such confinement.
Localization of light and applications: metallic mirrors, photonic
crystals, optical waveguides, microresonators, plasmonics.
Localization of quantum mechanical waves: quantum wells, wires,
and dots. Generation of light in semiconductors: spontaneous and
stimulated emission, lasers, and light emitting diodes. Devices
incorporating localization of both electromagnetic and quantum
mechanical waves such as resonant cavity quantum well lasers and
microcavity-based single photon sources. System-level applications
such as optical communications, biochemical sensing, and
quantum cryptography. Prerequisite: familiarity with electromagnetic
and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors at the
level of EE 41 or equivalent. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Vuckovic, J)
EE 140. The Earth From Space: Introduction to Remote Sensing
(Same as GEOPHYS 140) Global change science as viewed using
space remote sensing technology. Global warming, ozone depletion,
the hydrologic and carbon cycles, topographic mapping, and
surface deformation. Physical concepts in remote sensing. EM
waves and geophysical information. Sensors studied: optical, near
and thermal IR, active and passive microwave. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, not given this year
EE 141. Engineering Electromagnetics
Lumped versus distributed circuits. Transient response of transmission
lines with resistive and reactive loads. Reflection, transmission,
attenuation and dispersion. Steady-state waves on transmission
lines. Standing wave ratio, impedance matching, and power
flow. Coulomb’s law, electrostatic field, potential and gradient,
electric flux and Gauss’s Law and divergence. Metallic conductors,
Poisson’s and Laplace’s equations, capacitance, dielectric
materials. Electrostatic energy and forces. Steady electric currents,
Ohm’s Law, Kirchoff’s Laws, charge conservation and the continuity
equation, Joule’s Law. Biot-Savart’s law and the static magnetic
field. Ampere’s Law and curl. Vector magnetic potential and
magnetic dipole. Magnetic materials, forces and torques. Faraday’s
Law, magnetic energy, displacement current and Maxwell’s equations.
Uniform plane waves. Prerequisites: 102A, MATH 52.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Aut (Harris, S)
EE 168. Introduction to Digital Image Processing
Computer processing of digital 2-D and 3-D data, combining theoretical
material with implementation of computer algorithms. Topics:
properties of digital images, design of display systems and
algorithms, time and frequency representations, filters, image formation
and enhancement, imaging systems, perspective, morphing,
and animation applications. Instructional computer lab exercises
implement practical algorithms. Final project consists of computer
animations incorporating techniques learned in class. Prerequisite:
Matlab programming. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3-4 units, not given this year
EE 178. Probabilistic Systems Analysis
Introduction to probability and statistics and their role in modeling
and analyzing real world phenomena. Events, sample space, and
probability. Discrete random variables, probability mass functions,
independence and conditional probability, expectation and conditional
expectation. Continuous random variables, probability density
functions, independence and expectation, derived densities.
Transforms, moments, sums of independent random variables.
Simple random processes. Limit theorems. Introduction to statistics:
significance, hypothesis testing, estimation and detection,
Bayesian analysis. Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
GER:DB-EngrAppSci
3 units, Win (Gray, R)
EE 179. Introduction to Communications
Communication system design and performance analysis. Topics
include current communication systems (cellular, WLANs, radio
and TV broadcasting, satellites, Internet), Fourier techniques,
energy and power spectral density, random variables and random
(noise) signals, filtering and modulation of noise, analog modulation
(AM and FM) and its performance in noise, digital modulation
(PSK and FSK), optimal receiver design, and probability of bit
error for digital modulation. Prerequisite: 102A. GER:DBEngrAppSci
3 units, Spr (Goldsmith, A)
EE 190. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual
or team activities involve lab experimentation, design of
devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 191. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given
for a letter grade only. If a letter grade given on the basis of required
written report or examination is not appropriate, enroll in
190.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 192C. Embedded Systems Engineering
From problem statement to final fabrication at the system level.
Topics include: microprocessor architecture review; communication
protocols (I2C, SPI EIA/TIA232, 422,485, CAN, OneWire);
peripheral devices (timers, ADCs, DACs, human-computer interface);
solid state storage (CF, MMC); OrCAD design tools; hardware-
software interactions and design considerations; and real time
operating systems (ROTS). Final design project from concept to
PCB layout and firmware development.
3 units, not given this year
GRADUATE COURSES IN ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer
Seminar. For prospective entrepreneurs with an engineering background.
Contributions made to the business world by engineering
graduates. Speakers include Stanford and other engineering and
M.B.A. graduates who have founded large and small companies in
nearby communities. Contributions from EE faculty and other
departments including Law, Business, and MS&E.
1 unit, Win (Melen, R)
530 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
EE 204. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and
Computer Scientists
For graduate students with little or no business experience. Leading
computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and their
best practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions these
companies face. Corporate strategy, new product development,
marketing, sales, distribution, customer service, financial accounting,
outsourcing, and human behavior in business organizations.
Case studies. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
3 units, Spr (Gibbons, F)
EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes
For students interested in the physical bases and practical methods
of silicon VLSI chip fabrication, or the impact of technology on
device and circuit design, or intending to pursue doctoral research
involving the use of Stanford’s Nanofabrication laboratory.
Process simulators illustrate concepts and provide a virtual lab
experience. Topics: principles of integrated circuit fabrication
processes, physical and chemical models for crystal growth, oxidation,
ion implantation, etching, deposition, lithography, and backend
processing. Required for 410.
3 units, Aut (Plummer, J)
EE 214. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design
Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits in advanced MOS
and bipolar technologies. Device operation and compact modeling
in support of circuit simulations needed for design. Emphasis is on
quantitative evaluations of performance using hand calculations
and circuit simulations; intuitive approaches to design. Analytical
and approximate treatments of noise and distortion; analysis and
design of feedback circuits. Design of archetypal analog blocks for
networking and communications such as broadband gain stages
and transimpedance amplifiers. Prerequisite: EE 114.
3 units, Win (Murmann, B)
EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices
Carrier generation, transport, recombination, and storage in semiconductors.
Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction,
heterojunction, metal semiconductor contact, bipolar junction transistor,
MOS capacitor, MOS and junction field-effect transistors,
and related optoelectronic devices such as CCDs, solar cells,
LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models that reflect physical
principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis and
design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.
3 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Saraswat, K; Howe, R)
EE 216S. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices
For advanced undergraduates and graduate students. The fundamentals
of carrier transport and recombination generation in semiconductors.
The physical principles of the operation of the p-n
junctions, metal-semiconductor contacts, MOS capacitors, MOSFETs.
Overview of BJTs and photonic devices such as LEDs, lasers,
photodiodes, solar cells. Prerequisite: EE 116 or equivalent
2 units, Sum (Janjua, A)
EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I
Emphasis is on applications in modern devices and systems. Topics
include: Schrödinger’s equation, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues,
operator approach to quantum mechanics, Dirac notation, solutions
of simple problems including quantum wells and tunneling. Quantum
harmonic oscillator, coherent states. Calculation techniques
including matrix diagonalization, perturbation theory, and variational
method. Time-dependent perturbation theory, applications to optical
absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and Fermi’s golden rule.
Quantum mechanics in crystalline materials. Prerequisites: MATH
52 and 53, PHYSICS 65 (or PHYSICS 43 and 45).
3 units, Aut (Miller, D)
EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II
Continuation of 222, including more advanced topics: angular
momentum in quantum mechanics, spin, hydrogen atom, systems
of identical particles (bosons and fermions), methods for onedimensional
problems, introductory quantum optics (electromagnetic
field quantization, coherent states), fermion annihilation and
creation operators, interaction of different kinds of particles (spontaneous
emission, optical absorption, and stimulated emission).
Quantum information and interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Other topics in electronics, optoelectronics, optics, and quantum
information science. Prerequisite: 222.
3 units, Win (Miller, D)
EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics
Topics: energy band theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering,
classical kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and
non-equilibrium semiconductor statistics. Prerequisite: course in
modern physics.
3 units, Aut (Fan, S)
EE 231. Introduction to Lasers
How lasers work, including quantum transitions in atoms, stimulated
emission and amplification, rate equations, saturation, feedback,
coherent optical oscillation, laser resonators, and optical
beams. Limited primarily to steady-state behavior; classical models
for atomic transitions with little quantum mechanics background
required. Prerequisites: electromagnetic theory to the level
of 142, preferably 241, and some atomic or modern physics such
as PHYSICS 70 or 130, 131.
3 units, Win (Digonnet, M)
EE 232. Laser Dynamics
Continuation of 231, emphasizing dynamic and transient effects
including spiking, Q-switching, mode locking, frequency modulation,
frequency and spatial mode competition, linear and nonlinear
pulse propagation, short pulse expansion, and compression. Prerequisite:
231.
3 units, Spr (Fan, S)
EE 233. Analog Design Communications Laboratory
Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude modulation (AM)
using multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation (FM) based on
discrete oscillator and integrated modulator circuits such as voltage-
controlled oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop (PLL) techniques,
characterization of key parameters, and their applications.
Practical aspects of circuit implementations. Labs involve building
and characterization of AM and FM modulation/demodulation
circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited to 30 undergraduates
and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: 101B. Recommended:
122
3 units, Win (Dutton, R)
EE 234. Photonics Laboratory
Photonics and fiber optics with a focus on communication and
sensing. Experimental characterization of semiconductor lasers,
optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links,
optical amplifiers, and optical sensors and photonic crystals. Prerequisite:
EE 142.
3 units, Win (Vuckovic, J)
EE 235. Guided Wave Optical Devices
Guided wave optics, optical waveguide devices, and integrated
optics. Wave propagation in layered media, slab waveguides, and
optical fibers. Rectangular waveguides. Optical waveguide technology.
Coupled-mode theory. Numerical analysis of complex
waveguides. Photonic crystals. Physics and design of waveguide
devices. Fiber sensors, waveguide gratings, waveguide modulators,
directional couplers, ring filters. Prerequisite: electromagnetic
theory to the level of 142 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 237. Solar Energy Conversion
Basics of solar energy conversion in photovoltaic devices and solar
thermal systems. Solar cell device physics: electrical and optical.
Solar system issues including module assembly, inverters, and
micro-inverters. Concentrated solar power. Students design solar
cells. Prerequisite: EE 116 or EE 216.
3 units, Win (Staff)
EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves
Continuation of 141. Maxwell’s equations. Plane waves in lossless
and lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of electromagnetic power.
Poynting’s theorem. Reflection and refraction of waves at planar
boundaries. Snell’s law and total internal reflection. Reflection and
refraction from lossy media. Guided waves. Parallel-plate and
dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow wave-guides, cavity resonators,
microstrip waveguides, optical fibers. Interaction of fields
with matter and particles. Antennas and radiation of electromagnetic
energy. Prerequisite: 141 or PHYSICS 120.
3 units, Win (Fraser-Smith, A)
EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor physics and optical processes in semiconductors.
Operating principles and practical device features of semiconductor
optoelectronic materials and heterostructures. Devices include:
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10 | 531
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
optical detectors (p-i-n, avalanche, and MSM); light emitting diodes;
electroabsorptive modulators (Franz-Keldysh and QCSE),
electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-Zehnder), switches
(SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical cavity surface emitting).
Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and solid state physics
such as EE 216 and 228 or equivalents. Recommended: basic
quantum mechanics and lasers such as EE 216 and 231 or equivalents.
3 units, Win (Harris, J)
EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications
Fibers: single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion,
group-velocity dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear
effects in fibers: Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase
modulation, four-wave mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes,
laser diodes, transverse and longitudinal mode control, modulation,
chirp, linewidth, intensity noise. Modulators: electro-optic, electroabsorption.
Photodiodes: p-i-n, avalanche, responsivity, capacitance,
transit time. Receivers: high-impedance, transimpedance,
bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation formats: nonreturn-
to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance: Q factor, biterror
ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity degradations:
extinction ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion. Wavelengthdivision
multiplexing. System architectures: local-area, access,
metropolitan-area, long-haul. Prerequisites: 102A or 261, and 242
or 235 or 241, and 178 or 179.
3 units, Aut (Kahn, J)
EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes
Mathematical methods and physical principles: statistics, Fourier
analysis, statistical and quantum mechanics. Circuit theory: thermal
noise, quantum noise, fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Macroscopic
and mesoscopic conductors. Macroscopic and mesoscopic
p-n junctions. 1/f noise and random telegraphic noise. Negative
conductance oscillators (lasers) and nonlinear susceptance oscillators
(optical parametric amplifier). Optical and quantum communication
systems. Weak force detection systems. Prerequisites: elementary
device, circuit, and electromagnetic waves to the level of
101A,B and 242.
3 units, not given this year
EE 249. Introduction to the Space Environment
The environment through which space probes and vehicles travel
and orbit, and which moderates solar gases and radiation. Experimentation
in this environment, tools used; regions into which it is
divided including ionosphere, magnetosphere, heliosphere, and
interplanetary space. The role of the Sun, the effects of changes in
solar activity, charged particle motion which in combination with
the Earth’s magnetic field leads to auroras and the Van Allen belts.
Prerequisites: electromagnetics at the level of 242 and senior or
graduate standing.
3 units, not given this year
EE 252. Antennas for Telecommunications and Remote Sensing
Fundamental properties. Dipoles, loops, reflectors, Yagis, helices,
slots, horns, micro-strips. Antennas as transitions between guided
and free radiation, ultrasound analogue. Famous antennas. Pattern
measurements. Friis and radar equations. Feeds, matching, baluns.
Broadbanding. Arrays, aperture synthesis, interferometry, verylong-
baseline interferometry. Thermal radiation, antenna temperature,
microwave passive remote sensing. Prerequisite: 242 or
equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 256. Numerical Electromagnetics
Principles and applications of numerical techniques for solving
practical electromagnetics problems. Time domain solutions of
Maxwell’s equations. Finite difference time domain (FDTD) methods.
Numerical stability, dispersion, and dissipation. Absorbing
boundary conditions. Perfectly matched layer methods. Explicit
and implicit methods. FDTD modeling of propagation and scattering
in dispersive and anisotropic media. Near-to-far-zone transformations.
Computational problems require programming and use
of MATLAB and other tools. Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications
The Fourier transform as a tool for solving physical problems.
Fourier series, the Fourier transform of continuous and discrete
signals and its properties. The Dirac delta, distributions, and generalized
transforms. Convolutions and correlations and applications;
probability distributions, sampling theory, filters, and analysis of
linear systems. The discrete Fourier transform and the FFT algorithm.
Multidimensional Fourier transform and use in imaging.
Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis is on
relating the theoretical principles to solving practical engineering
and science problems. Prerequisites: Fourier series at the level of
102A, and linear algebra.
3 units, Aut (Osgood, B), Win (Nishimura, D), Sum (Bhatnagar,
R)
EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging
Time and frequency representations, two-dimensional auto- and
cross-correlation, Fourier spectra, diffraction and antennas, coordinate
systems and the Hankel and Abel transforms, line integrals,
impulses and sampling, restoration in the presence of noise, reconstruction
and tomography, imaging radar. Tomographic reconstruction
using projection-slice and layergarm methods. Students
create software to form images using these techniques with actual
data. Final project consists of design and simulation of an advanced
imaging system. Prerequisite: 261. Recommended: 278,
279.
3 units, Win (Zebker, H)
EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems
Applied linear algebra and linear dynamical systems with application
to circuits, signal processing, communications, and control
systems. Topics: least-squares approximations of over-determined
equations and least-norm solutions of underdetermined equations.
Symmetric matrices, matrix norm, and singular value decomposition.
Eigenvalues, left and right eigenvectors, with dynamical interpretation.
Matrix exponential, stability, and asymptotic behavior.
Multi-input/multi-output systems, impulse and step matrices;
convolution and transfer matrix descriptions. Control, reachability,
and state transfer; observability and least-squares state estimation.
Prerequisites: linear algebra and matrices as in MATH 103; differential
equations and Laplace transforms as in EE 102A.
3 units, Aut (Lall, S)
EE 264. Digital Signal Processing
Two sided Z-transform. Linear time invariant discrete time systems.
Sampling theory; A/D and D/A conversion. Analog and digital
filter design. Quantization of signals and filter conefficients.
Signal scaling. DFS, DFT, and sampling in the frequency domain.
Interpolation and decimation. Oversampling techniques for ADC
and DAC. Digital signal processing for wireless communications.
Prerequisite: 102B. Recommended: 261, 278.
3 units, Aut (Schafer, R), Sum (Aragon, J)
EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory
Applying 102A,B to real-world signal processing applications. Lab
exercises use a programmable DSP to implement signal processing
tasks. Topics: A/D conversion and quantization, sampling theorem,
Z-transform, discrete-time Fourier transform, digital filter design
and implementation, spectral analysis, rate conversion, wireless
data communication, and OFDM receiver design. Prerequisites:
102A,B. Recommended: 261.
3-4 units, Win (Meng, T)
EE 268. Introduction to Modern Optics
Geometrical optics: ray matrices, Gaussian beams, optical instruments,
and radiometry. Wave nature of light: Maxwell’s equations,
propagation through media with varying index of refraction (e.g.,
fibers). Interferometry: basic principles, practical systems, and
applications.
3 units, Aut (Byer, R)
EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems
Large-scale MOS design. Topics: MOS transistors, static and dynamic
MOS gates, MOS circuit fabrication, design rules, resistance
and capacitance extraction, power and delay estimation, scaling,
MOS combinational and sequential logic design, registers and
clocking schemes, memory, data-path, and control-unit design.
Elements of computer-aided circuit analysis, synthesis, and layout
techniques. Prerequisites: 101A and 108B; familiarity with transistors,
logic design, Verilog, and digital system organization.
3 units, Aut (Horowitz, M)
EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering
Electrical issues in the design of high-performance digital systems,
532 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
including signaling, timing, synchronization, noise, and power
distribution. High-speed signaling methods; noise in digital systems,
its effect on signaling, and methods for noise reduction; timing
conventions; timing noise (skew and jitter), its effect on systems,
and methods for mitigating timing noise; synchronization
issues and synchronizer design; clock and power distribution problems
and techniques; impact of electrical issues on system architecture
and design. Prerequisites: 102B and 108A, or equivalents.
Recommended: 214.
3 units, Win (Weaver, J)
EE 276. Introduction to Wireless Personal Communications
Frequency reuse, cellular concepts, cochannel interference, handoff.
Radio propagation in and around buildings: Friis equation,
multipath, narrow-band and wide-band channels, small scale and
large-scale statistics, space and time signal variation. Diversity.
Receiver sensitivity, sources of noise, range. Performance statistics:
coverage, margin, digital modulation, adjacent channel interference,
and digital error rates. Wide band channels: maximum
transmission rates. Multi-server queuing and traffic: Erlang formulas.
Multiple access, FDMA, TDMA, CDMA; duplexing, FDD and
TDD; multipath mitigation, OFDM, equalization, spread spectrum.
Prerequisites: 242 and 278 or equivalent. Corequisite: 279 or
equivalent.
3 units, Spr (Cox, D)
EE 278. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing
Random variables, vectors, and processes; convergence and limit
theorems; IID, independent increment, Markov, and Gaussian
random processes; stationary random processes; autocorrelation
and power spectral density; mean square error estimation, detection,
and linear estimation. Prerequisites: 178 or STATS 116, and
linear systems and Fourier transforms at the level of 102A,B or
261.
3 units, Aut (Prabhakar, B), Spr (Gill, J), Sum (Su, H)
EE 279. Introduction to Communication Systems
Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digital
modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion, multiplexing,
noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise ratio analysis,
probability of error in digital systems, spread spectrum. Prerequisites:
179 or 261, and 178 or 278.
3 units, Win (Cox, D)
EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture
Advanced system-level architecture techniques for devices such as
personal computers, servers, and embedded or portable systems.
Topics such as cache hierarchies, memory systems, storage and IO
systems, virtualization, clusters, fault-tolerance, and low-power
design. Interactions between hardware and software layers in such
systems. Performance analysis and optimization techniques for
small- and large-scale systems. Principles such as locality, coarsegrain
parallelism, overlapping communication and computation,
performance/power trade-offs, and reliability. Prerequisite: 108B.
Recommended: CS 140.
3 units, Spr (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks
Structure and components of computer networks; functions and
services; packet switching; layered architectures; OSI reference
model; physical layer; data link layer; error control; window flow
control; media access control protocols used in local area networks
(Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI) and satellite networks; network
layer (datagram service, virtual circuit service, routing, congestion
control, Internet Protocol); transport layer (UDP, TCP); application
layer.
3 units, Aut (Medapalli, K)
EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 290D. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program
of study. Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, candidacy
for Engineer or Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering; for 290C, candidacy
for Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering; for 290D, consent
of instructor.
1 unit, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 292E. Analysis and Control of Markov Chains
Finite-state and countable-state Markov chains. Controlled Markov
chains and dynamic programming algorithms. Application to modeling
and analysis of engineering systems. Prerequisites: 263, 278.
3 units, not given this year
EE 292G. Power Electronics
Power conversion fundamentals including linear/shunt regulators,
charge pumps, Buck, Boost, Buck-Boost, SEPIC, Cuk, and Flyback
converters, magnetic components, volt second balance, continuous/
discontinuous mode, synchronous/non-synchronous operation,
voltage/current mode control, fixed frequency PWM and
constant on or off time control, control loop analysis, compensator
design, RMS/average value calculations for PWM current waveforms,
inductor, capacitor, and MOSFET parasitics, output ripple,
transient response, gate drive strategies, efficiency prediction, soft
start, current limit, efficiency and power loss plots.
3 units, Aut (Staff)
EE 293A. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
For seniors and graduate students. Thermodynamics, heat engines,
thermoelectics, biomass. Recommended: MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS
41, 43, 45
3-4 units, Aut (da Rosa, A)
EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes
For seniors and graduate students. Fuel cells. Production of hydrogen:
electrolytic, chemical, thermolytic, photolytic. Hydrogen
storage: hydrides. Photoelectric converters; photo-thermovoltaic
converters. Wind turbines. Recommended: EE 293A; MATH 41;
PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
3-4 units, Win (da Rosa, A)
EE 300. Master’s Thesis and Thesis Research
Independent work under the direction of a department faculty.
Written thesis required for final letter grade. The continuing grade
‘N’ is given in quarters prior to thesis submission. See 390 if a
letter grade is not appropriate.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 302. Biomedical Electronics
Biomedical electronics and instruments based on electrical engineering
for diagnostics and therapeutic treatments of biological
systems, focusing on the theory and design principles in modern
biomedical electronics using electromagnetic properties. Topics
include circuit design for implanted medical devices, physics and
signal processing for medical imaging systems, techniques for
neural measurements and neuro-decoding, and electronics for drug
delivery. Prerequisites: EE 214, 264,and 265.
3 units, Win (Poon, A)
EE 303. Autonomous Implantable Systems
How implantable systems can revolutionize health care in the coming
decades. Potential applications include implantable sensors and
monitoring devices for preventive and post-surgery monitoring;
drug delivery systems that can be placed closer to cancer cells and
are able to administer dosage automatically; medical robots that
perform surgery inside patients with greater precision and less
pain; and neural implants for brain-machine interface. Focus is on
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10 | 533
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
the analysis and design of remotely-powered, miniature implantable
devices for those applications.
3 units, Spr (Poon, A)
EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology
Memory devices: SRAM, DRAM, NVRAM (non-volatile memory).
Functionality and performance of ULSI systems. Semiconductor
memories, device design considerations, device scaling, device
fabrication, addressing, and readout circuits. Cell structures (1T-
1C, 6T, 4T, 1T-1R, 0T-1R, floating gate FLASH, SONOS,
NROM), and memory organization (open bit-line, folded bit-line,
NAND, NOR, cross-point). New memory concepts such as nanocrystal
memory, single-electron memory, magnetic tunnel junction
memory (MRAM), ferroelectric memory (FRAM), phase change
memory (PRAM), T-RAM, polymer memory, metal oxide memory,
nanoconductive bridge memory). Prerequisite: 216. Recommended:
212, 311, 316.
3 units, Aut (Wong, P)
EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar
State-of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, advanced
materials, and nanoscience for device applications. Prerequisites:
216, 316.
1 unit, Win (Nishi, Y; Wong, P; Saraswat, K)
EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuits Technology
Practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of the technology
of modern MOS devices. Modern device and circuit fabrication
and likely future changes. Advanced techniques and models of
device and back-end (interconnect and contact) processing. Use of
TSUPREM4 and MEDICI for process and device modeling. MOS
process integration. Prerequisites: 212, 216.
3 units, Spr (Saraswat, K)
EE 312. Micromachined Sensors and Actuators
Solid-state sensors and actuators, focusing on the use of integrated
circuit fabrication technology for their realization. Categories of
sensors and actuators include biological, chemical, mechanical,
optical, and thermal. Mechanisms of transduction, fabrication
techniques, and relative merits of different technologies. Micromachining
techniques for monolithic integration of active circuits
with sensors or actuators. Directions for future research. Prerequisite:
212 or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Giovangrandi, L)
EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits
Analysis and design of digital MOS integrated circuits. Development
of different models for MOS transistors and how to use them
to analyze circuit performance. Use of computer-aided circuit
analysis. Logic styles include static, dynamic and pass logic, pulsemode
gates, and current-mode logic. Topics include sizing for min
delay, noise and noise margins, power dissipation. The class uses
memory design (SRAM) as a motivating example. DRAM and
EEPROM design issues. Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended:
271.
3 units, Win (Kim, J)
EE 314. RF Integrated Circuit Design
Design of RF integrated circuits for communications systems,
primarily in CMOS. Topics: the design of matching networks and
low-noise amplifiers at RF, passive and active filters, mixers,
modulators, and demodulators; review of classical control concepts
necessary for oscillator design including PLLs and PLL-based
frequency synthesizers. Design of low phase noise oscillators.
Design of high-efficiency (e.g., class E, F) RF power amplifiers,
coupling networks. Behavior and modeling of passive and active
components at RF. Narrowband and broadband amplifiers; noise
and distortion measures and mitigation methods. Overview of transceiver
architectures. Prerequisite: 214.
3 units, Spr (Lee, T)
EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits
Design and analysis of integrated circuits for active filters, precision
gain stages, and sensor interfaces in CMOS VLSI technology.
Operational transconductance amplifiers; sampled-data and continuous-
time analog filters. Analysis of noise and amplifier imperfections;
compensation techniques such as correlated double sampling.
Sensor interfaces for micro-electromechanical and biomedical
applications. Layout techniques for analog integrated circuits.
3 units, Spr (Murmann, B)
EE 315B. VLSI Data Conversion Circuits
Architectural and circuit level design and analysis of integrated
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS VLSI
technology. Circuit elements such as sample-and-hold circuits and
voltage comparators. Circuits and architectures for Nyquist-rate
and oversampling analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion;
digital decimation and interpolation filters. Examples of calibration
and digital enhancement techniques. Prerequisite:EE 214.
Recommended: EE 315A.
3 units, Aut (Murmann, B)
EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices
In modern VLSI technologies, device electrical characteristics are
sensitive to structural details and therefore to fabrication techniques.
How are advanced VLSI devices designed and what future
changes are likely? What are the implications for device electrical
performance caused by fabrication techniques? Physical models
for nanometer scale structures, control of electrical characteristics
(threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic transport) in
small structures, and alternative device structures for VLSI. Prerequisites:
212 and 216, or equivalent.
3 units, Win (Wong, P)
EE 317. Micropatterning for Integrated Circuits
The fundamentals of generating submicron patterns in integrated
circuit manufacturing. Technologies include the formation of submicron
images of ultraviolet light, the resulting exposure of polymeric
resists, the subsequent development of resist patterns and
their transfer into functional circuit material patterns through
plasma etching and other techniques. Use of phase-shifting masks
and other wavefront-engineering approaches. Hands-on computer
simulations. Prerequisites: 141 or equivalent, 212 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology
Recent advances in materials science, device physics and structures,
and processing technology, to extend VLS1 device scaling
towards atomistic and quantum-mechanical physics boundaries.
Topics include: mobility-enhancement techniques; nanomaterial
structures including tube, wire, beam, and crystal; conducting polymer;
3D FET; gate-wraparound FET; nonvolatile memory phenomena
and devices; self-assembly; flash annealing; plasma doping;
and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.
3 units, Spr (Nishi, Y; Sze, S)
EE 320. Nanoelectronics
Focus is on the device physics and operation principles of nanoelectric
devices. Topics identified by the International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors, emerging research devices section;
see http://www.itrs.net. Non-silicon-based devices such as carbon
nanotubes, grapheme, semiconductor nanowires, and molecular
devices; and non-FET based devices such as single electron transistors
(SET) and resonant tunneling diodes (RTD). Logic and
memory devices. Prerequisites: undergraduate device physics, EE
222, 216. Recommended: EE 223, 228, or 316.
3 units, not given this year
EE 322. Molecular Electronics and Photonics
Physics of charge and energy transfer in molecular systems and
connection with traditional mesoscopic transport theories. Analysis
of molecular organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells and
transistors. Technology and applications of molecular semiconductors.
Prerequisite: 228 or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials
Modern semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are based on
unique energy band, carrier transport, and optical properties of
semiconductor materials. How to choose these properties for operation
of semiconductor devices. Emphasis is on quantum mechanical
foundations of the properties of solids, energy bandgap engineering,
semiclassical transport theory, semiconductor statistics,
carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport effects, high field
ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation, quantum mechanical
transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and nonradiative
recombination. Prerequisites: 216, 228.
3 units, not given this year
EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices
Principles governing the operation of modern semiconductor devices.
Assumptions and approximations commonly made in ana534
| STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
lyzing devices. Emphasis is on the application of semiconductor
physics to the development of advanced semiconductor devices
such as heterojunctions, HJ-bipolar transistors, HJ-FETs, nanostructures,
tunneling, single electron transistor and photonic devices.
Use of ATLAS, a 2-D Poisson solver, for simulation of ultrasmall
devices. Examples related to state-of-the-art devices and
current device research. Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.
3 units, Spr (Harris, J)
EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces
Physical concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques
probing the electronic structure of surfaces and interfaces. Microscopic
and atomic models of microstructures; applications such as
within semiconductor device technology and catalysis. Physical
processes of low energy electron diffraction, Auger electron spectroscopy,
UV and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, electron/ photon
stimulated ion desorption, inelastic tunneling spectroscopy, ion
scattering, surface EXAFS, and energy loss spectroscopy; and experimental
aspects of these surface science techniques. Prerequisites:
PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 334. Micro and Nano Optical Device Design
Lecture and project course on design and analysis of optical devices
with emphasis on opportunities and challenges created by scaling
to the micrometer and nanometer ranges. The emphasis is on
fundamentals, combined with some coverage of practical implementations.
Prerequisite: 242 or equivalent
3 units, Aut (Solgaard, O)
EE 335. Introduction to Information Storage Systems
State-of-the-art data storage technologies, including magnetic disk
drive storage, optical data storage (CD-ROM, DVD, magnetooptic
recording), solid state memory (flash memory, ferro-electric
memory), and emerging technologies (magnetic random access
memory, probe-based storage). Magnetic disk recording and comparisons
among data storage technologies. Related nanotechnologies.
Final presentation. Prerequisites: electromagnetism, optics,
transistors, binary algebra, probability, and Fourier transform.
3 units, not given this year
EE 336. Nanophotonics
(Same as MATSCI 346) Recent developments in micro- and nanophotonic
materials and devices. Basic concepts of photonic crystals.
Integrated photonic circuits. Photonic crystal fibers. Superprism
effects. Optical properties of metallic nanostructures. Subwavelength
phenomena and plasmonic excitations. Meta-materials.
Prerequisite: electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.
3 units, Win (Fan, S; Brongersma, M)
EE 340. Advanced Topics in Optics and Quantum Optics
Optical microcavities and their device applications. Types of optical
microcavities (microdisks, microspheres, and photonic crystal
cavities), and their electromagnetic properties, design, and fabrication
techniques. Cavity quantum electrodynamics: strong and
weak-coupling regime, Purcell factor, spontaneous emission control.
Applications of optical microcavities, including low-threshold
lasers, resonant cavity light-emitting diodes, and single-photon
sources. Prerequisites: advanced undergraduate or basic graduatelevel
knowledge of electromagnetics, quantum mechanics, and
physics of semiconductors.
3 units, Spr (Vuckovic, J)
EE 343. Advanced Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor quantum well structures; superlattices and coupled
quantum wells; optical properties of quantum wells; valence band
structure; effects of strain; quantum well lasers; intersubband detectors;
excitons in quantum wells; absorption saturation; electroabsorption;
quantum well modulators and switches. Prerequisites: 222 or
equivalent quantum mechanics, 243. Recommended: 223.
3 units, Spr (Miller, D)
EE 344. High Frequency Laboratory
Lecture/lab emphasizing lab. Techniques in the 1MHz-1GHz range
useful in designing and measuring oscillators, amplifiers, and mixers.
High frequency measurement techniques including sparameter
measurements, amplifier noise figure, and oscillator
phase noise. Guest speakers from Lucent and Hewlett-Packard.
Enrollment limited to 25. Prerequisites: transmission lines, Smith
charts. Recommended: 314.
3 units, Aut (Scherer, D; Swain, H; Cox, D)
EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory
Experimental techniques in optical fiber communications. Experimental
investigation of key optical communications components
including fibers, lasers, modulators, photodiodes, optical amplifiers,
and WDM multiplexers and demultiplexers. Key optical communications
systems techniques: eye diagrams and BER measurements.
Prerequisites: undergraduate physics and optics.
3 units, not given this year
EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics
Wave propagation in anisotropic, nonlinear, and time-varying media.
Microscopic and macroscopic description of electric dipole
susceptibilities. Free and forced waves-phasematching; slowly
varying envelope approximation-dispersion, diffraction, spacetime
analogy; harmonic generation; frequency conversion; parametric
amplification and oscillation; electro-optic light modulation;
nonlinear processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites: 141, 242.
3 units, Spr (Harris, S)
EE 347. Optical Methods in Engineering Science
Design and understanding of modern optical systems. Topics:
geometrical optics; aberration theory; systems layout; applications
such as microscopes, telescopes, optical processors. Computer ray
tracing program as a design tool. Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or
equivalent.
3 units, Win (Hesselink, L)
EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications
Optical amplifiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor amplifiers.
Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. System applications: preamplified
receiver performance, amplifier chains. Raman amplifiers,
lumped vs. distributed amplification. Group-velocity dispersion
management: dispersion-compensating fibers, filters, gratings.
Interaction of dispersion and nonlinearity, dispersion maps. Multichannel
systems. Wavelength-division multiplexing components:
filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk. Time-, subcarrier-,
code- and polarization-division multiplexing. Comparison of modulation
techniques: differential phase-shift keying, phase-shift
keying, quadrature-amplitude modulation. Comparison of detection
techniques: noncoherent, differentially coherent, coherent.
Prerequisite: 247.
3 units, Win (Kahn, J)
EE 349. Nano Optics and Grating Photonics
Coupled wave analysis of periodic structures, gratings structures
for optical communcations, wave-matter interactions with periodic
media and photonic crystals, applications of periodic structures.
Prerequisite: 268 or 366, or equivalent.
3 units, not given this year
EE 350. STARLab Seminar
Research topics from space physics, planetary exploration, ionospheric
and magnetospheric physics, radar and remote sensing of
the environment, applied electromagnetics, waves in optical fibers,
and information systems with space applications. Applied research
areas include wireless personal communications, high bandwidth
wired and wireless transmission, optical communication systems,
sensor networks, and related underlying and advancing technologies.
1 unit, not given this year
EE 354. Introduction to Radio Wave Scattering
Integral and differential equations of radio wave scattering; exact,
approximate, and numerical solutions of single particle scattering
for spheres, edges, points, and cylinders. Scattering from rough
surfaces with large and small roughness scales, as time permits.
Multiple scattering; formulation and solution techniques for equation
of transfer in discrete media and scattering by continuous
media in weak and strong regimes. Applications to radar, radar
astronomy, remote sensing, and biological media. Prerequisites:
electromagnetic theory through standard graduate engineering
topics; partial differential equations, boundary value problems in
rectangular and spherical coordinates; and consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications
(Same as GEOPHYS 265) Radar remote sensing, radar image
characteristics, viewing geometry, range coding, synthetic aperture
processing, correlation, range migration, range/Doppler algorithms,
wave domain algorithms, polar algorithm, polarimetric
processing, interferometric measurements. Applications: polarimeSTANFORD
BULLETIN, 2009-10 | 535
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
try and target discrimination, topographic mapping surface displacements,
velocities of ice fields.
3 units, not given this year
EE 356. Elementary Plasma Physics: Principles and Applications
Plasmas in nature and industry. Single particle motions. Plasma
kinetic theory. Boltzmann equation and its moments. Cold and
warm plasma models. Plasma as a fluid. Magnetohydrodynamics.
Plasma conductivity and diffusion. Langmuir oscillations. Debye
shielding. Plasma sheath. Waves in cold, magnetized, warm, and
hot plasmas. Electron and ion waves. MHD waves. Landau damping.
Nonlinear effects. Applications in industry and space science.
Prerequisite: 242 or PHYSICS 122.
3 units, not given this year
EE 359. Wireless Communication
Design, performance analysis, and performance limits of wireless
systems. Topics include: current wireless systems, path loss and
shadowing, statistical multipath channel models, capacity of wireless
channels, digital modulation and its performance in fading and
intersymbol interference, adaptive modulation, diversity, multiple
antenna systems (MIMO), equalization, multicarrier modulation,
and spread spectrum and RAKE receivers. Possible additional
topics: multiuser system design issues such as multiple access,
frequency reuse in cellular systems, and ad hoc wireless network
design. Prerequisite: 279.
3-4 units, Aut (Goldsmith, A)
EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks
Design, analysis, and fundamental limits. Possible topics include
multiuser detection and interference cancellation, multiple access,
cellular system design and optimization, Shannon capacity and
achievable rate regions of wireless multiuser channels and networks,
ad hoc wireless network design, sensor and energyconstrained
networks, and cross-layer design. Prerequisite: 359.
3 units, Win (Goldsmith, A)
EE 363. Linear Dynamic Systems
Continuation of 263. Optimal control and dynamic programming;
linear quadratic regulator. Lyapunov theory and methods. Linear
estimation and the Kalman filter. Perron-Frobenius theory. Examples
and applications from digital filters, circuits, signal processing, and
control systems. Prerequisites: 263 or equivalent; basic probability.
3 units, not given this year
EE 364A. Convex Optimization I
Convex sets, functions, and optimization problems. The basics of
convex analysis and theory of convex programming: optimality
conditions, duality theory, theorems of alternative, and applications.
Least-squares, linear and quadratic programs, semidefinite
programming, and geometric programming. Numerical algorithms
for smooth and equality constrained problems; interior-point methods
for inequality constrained problems. Applications to signal
processing, communications, control, analog and digital circuit
design, computational geometry, statistics, machine learning, and
mechanical engineering. Prerequisite: linear algebra such as 263.
3 units, Spr (Boyd, S)
EE 364B. Convex Optimization II
Continuation of 364. Subgradient, cutting-plane, and ellipsoid methods.
Decentralized convex optimization via primal and dual decomposition.
Alternating projections. Exploiting problem structure
in implementation. Convex relaxations of hard problems, and global
optimization via branch and bound. Robust optimization. Applications
in areas such as control, circuit design, signal processing, and
communications. Substantial project. Prerequisite: 364A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 366. Introduction to Fourier Optics
Applications of Fourier theory to the analysis and synthesis of
optical imaging and optical data processing systems. Propagation
and diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer approximations,
Fourier transforming properties of lenses, image formation with
coherent and incoherent light, transform functions of imaging systems,
optical data processing, and holography. Prerequisite: familiarity
with Fourier analysis. Recommended: 261.
3 units, Aut (Hesselink, L)
EE 368. Digital Image Processing
Image sampling and quantization, color, point operations, segmentation,
linear image filtering and correlation, image transforms,
eigenimages, multidimensional signals and systems, multiresolution
image processing, wavelets, morphological image processing,
noise reduction and restoration, simple feature extraction and recognition
tasks, image registration. Students write and investigate
image processing algorithms in Matlab. Competitive term project.
Prerequisites: 261, 278.
3 units, Spr (Girod, B)
EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I
Imaging internal structures within the body using high-energy
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities covered: xray,
computed tomography, and nuclear medicine. Analysis of
existing and proposed systems in terms of resolution, frequency
response, detection sensitivity, noise, and potential for improved
diagnosis. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, not given this year
EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II
Imaging internal structures within the body using non-ionizing
radiation studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities include
ultrasound and magnetic resonance. Analysis of ultrasonic systems
including diffraction and noise. Analysis of magnetic resonance
systems including physics, Fourier properties of image formation,
and noise. Prerequisite: 261.
3 units, Spr (Nishimura, D)
EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction
Reconstruction problems from medical imaging, including magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and
positron emission tomography (PET). Problems include reconstruction
from non-uniform frequency domain data, automatic
deblurring, phase unwrapping, reconstruction from incomplete
data, and reconstruction from projections. Prerequisite: 369B.
3 units, not given this year
EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design
Issues in high performance digital CMOS VLSI design from a
system perspective. Topics: wire modeling, logic families, latch
design and clocking issues, clock distribution, RAMs, ALUs, I/O
and I/O noise issues. Final project involves the design of a subsystem
for a high-speed processor. Extensive use of SPICE. Prerequisites:
271 and 313, or consent of instructor.
3 units, not given this year
EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing
Learning algorithms for adaptive digital filters. Self optimization.
Wiener filter theory. Quadratic performance functions, their eigenvectors
and eigenvalues. Speed of convergence. Asymptotic performance
versus convergence rate. Applications of adaptive filters
to statistical prediction, process modeling, adaptive noise cancelling,
adaptive antenna arrays, adaptive inverse control, and equalization
and echo cancelling in modems. Theoretical and experimental
research projects in adaptive filter theory, communications, and
audio systems. Biomedical research projects, supervised jointly by
EE and Medical School faculty. Recommended: 263, 264, 278.
3 units, Win (Widrow, B)
EE 373B. Adaptive Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks. Feedforward layered networks. Backpropagation
algorithm. Recurrent neural networks. Autoassociative
neural networks. Principal component analysis. Clustering algorithms.
Applications of neural networks to pattern recognition,
speech recognition, adaptive control, nonlinear adaptive filtering,
and cognitive memory. Modeling human memory. Design of human-
like memory for computers, with applications to face recognition,
image processing, and complex control. Continuation of research
projects begun in 373A. Prerequisite: 373A.
3 units, Spr (Widrow, B)
EE 375. Quantization Noise
Statistical analysis of quantization noise in digital filters, digital
control systems, digital communication systems, and in digital
computation. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion.
Uniform quantization and floating-point quantization. Sampling
and quantization of sinusoidal and gaussian signals. Quantizing
theorems derived from Nyquist/Shannon sampling theory. Quantization
analyzed as additive uniformly-distributed white noise when
conditions for quantizing theorems are met. Quantizer linearization
by means of additive random dither signals. Coefficient quantization
in digital filters. Recommended: 278.
3 units, Aut (Widrow, B)
536 | STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
EE 376A. Information Theory
Extreme points of communication theory: data compression to the
entropy limit, and communication at the channel capacity limit.
Shannon entropy. Rate distortion theory. Huffman coding. Kolmogorov
complexity. Unified treatment based on the asymptotic
equipartition theorem. Prerequisite: 178 or 278 or STATS 116, or
equivalent.
3 units, Win (Weissman, I)
EE 376B. Information Theory
Rate distortion theory and Kolmogorov complexity. Information
theory and statistics. Method of types. Stein’s lemma. AEP. Information
capacity of networks. Slepian-Wolf theorem. Optimal investment
and information theory. Universal portfolios and universal
data compression. Maximum entropy and Burg’s theorem.
Prerequisite: 376A.
3 units, Spr (Cover, T)
EE 378. Statistical Signal Processing
Random signals in electrical engineering. Discrete-time random
processes: stationarity and ergodicity, covariance sequences, power
spectral density, parametric models for stationary processes.
Fundamentals of linear estimation: minimum mean squared error
estimation, optimum linear estimation, orthogonality principle, the
Wold decomposition. Causal linear estimation of stationary
processes: the causal Wiener filter, Kalman filtering. Parameter
estimation: criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher information,
Cramer-Rao inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality, maximum
likelihood estimation, method of moments, consistency, efficiency.
ARMA parameter estimation: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-
Durbin algorithm, least squares estimation, moving average parameter
estimation, modified Yule-Walker method for model order
selection. Spectrum estimation: sample covariances, covariance
estimation, Bartlett formula, periodogram, periodogram averaging,
windowed periodograms. Prerequisite: 278.
3 units, Spr (Weissman, I)
EE 379. DIGITAL COMMUNICATION
Modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, baseband and
passband system analysis, minimum-probability-of-error and maximum-
likelihood detection, error-probability analysis, intersymbol
interference, maximum-likelihood sequence detection, equalization
methods, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing.Prerequisite:
EE102A, EE278
3 units, not given this year
EE 380. Seminar on Computer Systems
Current research in the design, implementation, analysis, and use
of computer systems from integrated circuits to operating systems
and programming languages.
1 unit, Aut (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Win (Allison, D; Freeman,
J), Spr (Allison, D; Freeman, J), Sum (Allison, D)
EE 382A. Advanced Processor Architecture
Topics include advanced instruction-set design and pipelining,
wide instruction fetch, branch prediction, out-of-order and speculative
execution, memory disambiguation, vector processors, simultaneous
multithreading, multi-core systems, memory hierarchies,
and low-level compiler optimizations for processor efficiency.
Trade-offs among performance, power, and complexity, and techniques
for addressing them. Design or research project in processor
architecture. Prerequisites: 108B, Recommended: 282.
3 units, Aut (Kozyrakis, C)
EE 382C. Interconnection Networks
The architecture and design of interconnection networks used to
communicate from processor to memory, from processor to processor,
and in switches and routers. Topics: network topology,
routing methods, flow control, router microarchitecture, and performance
analysis. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.
3 units, not given this year
EE 382D. Advanced Computer Arithmetic
Number systems, floating point representation, state of the art in
arithmetic algorithms, problems in the design of high speed arithmetic
units. Prerequisite: 282.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards
Local area networks: MAC addressing; IEEE 802.1 bridging protocols
(transparent bridging, virtual LANs). Internet routing protocols:
Internet protocol (IPv4, IPv6, ICMP); interior gateways (RIP,
OSPF) and exterior gateways (BGP, policy routing); IP multicast
(IGMP, DVMRP, CBT, MOSPF, PIM); multiprotocol label
switching (MPLS). Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384B. Multimedia Communication over the Internet
Applications and requirements. Traffic generation and characterization:
voice encoding (G.711, G.729, G.723); image and video
compression (JPEG, H.261, MPEG-2, H.263, H.264), TCP data
traffic. Quality impairments and measures. Networking technologies:
LAN technologies; home broadband services (ADSL, cable
modems, PONs); and wireless LANs (802.11). Network protocols
for multimedia applications: resource reservation (ST2+, RSVP);
differentiated services (DiffServ); and real-time transport protocol
(RTP, RTCP). Audio-video-data conferencing standards: Internet
architecture (SDP, SAP, SIP); ITU recommendations (H.320,
H.323 and T.120); and real-time streaming protocol (RTSP). Prerequisite:
284 or CS 244A. Recommended: 384A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384C. Wireless Local Area Networks
Characteristics of wireless communication: multipath, noise, and
interference. Communications techniques: spread-spectrum,
CDMA, and OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical layer specifications:
FHSS, DSSS, IEEE 802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g (OFDM).
IEEE 802.11 media access control protocols: carrier sense multiple
access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), point coordination
function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated services. IEEE
802.11 network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure modes,
access point functionality. Management functions: synchronization,
power management and association. Current research papers
in the open literature. Prerequisite: 284 or CS 244A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384M. Network Science
Theory and practice of designing and analyzing algorithms arising
in networks. Topics include: designing algorithms for load balancing,
switching, congestion control, network measurement, the web
infrastructure, and wireless networks; and analyzing the performance
of algorithms via stochastic network theory. Algorithm
design using randomization, probabilistic sampling, and other approximation
methods. Analysis methods include the use of large
deviation theory, fluid models, and stochastic comparison. Research
project. Prerequisite: 278 or CS 365.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384P. Projects: The Programmable Open Mobile Internet
(POMI)
A new Stanford research program in EE and CS to define the next
generation of mobile computing: from the handheld device and its
operating system to the network, radios, and cloud computing that
supports the user. Small student teams prototype part of the next
Internet architecture. Emphasis is on how the Internet can support
billions of mobile users. Prerequisite: EE 284, CS 244A, CS 144,
or equivalents, and programming skills.
3 units, not given this year
EE 384S. Network Architectures and Performance Engineering
Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance network
engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic modeling,
queueing networks and congestion management, dynamic
programming and task/processor scheduling, network dimensioning
and optimization, and simulation methods. Applications for
design of high-performance architectures for wireline/wireless
networks and the Internet, including: traffic modeling, admission
and congestion control, quality of service support, power control in
wireless networks, packet scheduling in switches, video streaming
over wireless links, and virus/worm propagation dynamics and
countermeasures. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisites: basic
networking technologies and probability.
3 units, Spr (Bambos, N)
EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures I
First of two-course sequence. Theory and practice of designing
packet switches and routers. Evolution of switches and routers.
Output scheduling: fairness, delay guarantees, algorithms. Unicast
switching: blocking phenomena and their alleviation, connection
between switch scheduling and bipartite graph matching. Multicast
switching. Theoretical complements: simple queueing models,
STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10 | 537
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (EE)
Bernoulli and Poisson processes, graph matching algorithms, urn
problems, stability analysis using Lyapunov functions, fluid models.
Prerequisites: 284 or CS 244A, 178 or 278 or STAT 116.
3 units, Spr (McKeown, N)
EE 384Y. Packet Switch Architectures II
Second of two-course sequence. Theory and practice of designing
packet switches and routers. Address lookup: exact matches, longest
prefix matches, performance metrics, hardware and software
solutions. Packet classifiers: for firewalls, QoS, and policy-based
routing; graphical description and examples of 2-D classification,
examples of classifiers, theoretical and practical considerations.
3 units, not given this year
EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar
Student/faculty discussions of research problems in the design of
reliable digital systems. Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for
testability, production testing, and system reliability. Emphasis is
on student presentations and Ph.D. thesis research. May be repeated
for credit. Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
1-4 units, Aut (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Win (McCluskey, E;
Mitra, S), Spr (McCluskey, E; Mitra, S), Sum (McCluskey, E)
EE 386. Robust System Design
Causes of system malfunctions; techniques for building robust
systems that avoid or are resilient to such malfunctions through
built-in error detection and correction, prediction, self-test, selfrecovery,
and self-repair; case studies and new research problems.
Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.
3 units, Spr (Mitra, S)
EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes
Algebraic codes for detection and correction of random and burst
errors. Introduction to finite fields. Linear block codes, cyclic
codes, Hamming codes, Fire codes, BCH codes, Reed-Solomon
codes. Decoding algorithms for BCH and Reed-Solomon codes.
Prerequisites: elementary probability, linear algebra.
3 units, not given this year
EE 388. Modern Coding Theory
Tools for analysis and optimization of iterative coding systems.
LDPC, turbo and, RA codes. Optimized ensembles, message passing
algorithms, density evolution, and analytic techniques. Prerequisite:
376A.
3 units, Spr (Montanari, A)
EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual
or team activities may involve lab experimentation, design
of devices or systems, or directed reading.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written
report or written examination required. Letter grade given on the
basis of the report; if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 392B. Introduction to Imaging Sensors
Design and analysis: silicon photodetectors; CCD and CMOS passive
and active sensor operation; noise and FPN analysis; spatial
resolution and MTF; SNR and dynamic range; high dynamic range
architectures; A/D conversion approaches. Analysis of the signal
path in a digital camera starting from the optics, through the sensor,
the A/D converter, to the different color processing steps.
MATLAB camera simulator is used to explore various tradeoffs in
camera design. Prerequisites: undergraduate level device, circuit,
and system background equivalent to 102A, 101A,B; and familiarity
with noise analysis.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits
Solving logic design problems with CAD tools for VLSI circuits.
Exact and heuristic algorithms for logic synthesis. Representation
and optimization of combinational logic functions (encoding problems,
binary decision diagrams) and of multiple-level networks
(algebraic and Boolean methods, don’t-care set computation, timing
verification, and optimization);and modeling and optimization
of sequential functions and networks (retiming), semicustom libraries,
and library binding. Prerequisites: familiarity with logic design,
algorithm development, and programming.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392G. Terahertz Technologies and Applications
Principles of THz wave generation, detection, and applications.
Sources and systems that provide access to the THz region of the
spectrum include ultrafast time-domain systems, direct generation
using terahertz lasers as well as nonlinear optical frequency conversion.
Terahertz measurement techniques include detector technologies,
terahertz waveguides, terahertz measurements using
surface plasmons, near-field effects, and nonlinear optical methods
of detection. Applications of terahertz radiation including spectroscopy,
sensing, and imaging, holography, terahertz communications
concepts and systems, photonic crystals, and metamaterials.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392H. Coding for Wireless Channels
Theoretical foundations of modern coding theory, with applications
to wireless transmission systems. State-of-the-art coding
theory using soft (maximum-likelihood) decoding. Topics include:
fading channel models (independent fading, block fading, MIMO);
information-theoretic performance limits; coding on signal spaces;
optimization criteria for code design; factor-graphical models of
codes including block, convolutional, turbo, LDPC, and concatenated
codes; trellis-coded modulation and bit-interleaved modulation;
iterative (turbo) receivers for coded signals: memoryless,
intersymbol-interference, MIMO, and multiuser channels; and
EXIT-chart analyses of performance. Prerequisites: EE 278, 279.
Recommended: EE 376A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 392M. Fault Diagnostics Systems
Overview of current diagnostic systems engineering practices,
emphasizing approaches that are usually referred to as advanced in
industry. Real life implementation constraints. Guest lectures by
experts from key sectors, including aerospace, automotive, semiconductor
manufacturing, networking, and enterprise computing
industries. May be repeated for credit. Recommended: STATS
116; EE 263 or ENGR 207A; EE 278 or ENGR 207B.
1 unit, not given this year
EE 392R. Charged Particle Optics
Electron optics of charged particle instruments including transmission
electron microscope, scanning electron microscope and related
tools, mass and energy spectrometers, electron beam lithography
tools, focused ion beam systems, electron diffraction, proximal
probe tools such as the scanning tunneling microscope. Topics
include sources, first-order focusing of electrons and ions,
third-order aberrations, space-charge effects and diffraction. Goal
is to compute the optical parameters of axially-symmetric magnetic
and electric lenses and to be familiar with the principles of operation
of the above charged-particle systems and the factors limiting
their performance. Prerequisites: undergraduate geometrical optics
and vector calculus or 217.
3 units, Spr (Pease, R)
EE 392T. Seminar in Chip Test and Debug
Seminars by industry professionals in digital IC manufacturing test
and silicon debug. Topics include yield and binsplit modeling,
defect types and detection, debug hardware, physical analysis, and
design for test/debug circuits. Case studies of silicon failures. Prerequisite:
basic digital IC design (271 or 371).
1 unit, Aut (Stinson, J)
EE 395. Electrical Engineering Instruction: Practice Teaching
Open to advanced EE graduate students who plan to make teaching
their career. Students conduct a section of an established course
taught in parallel by an experienced instructor. Enrollment limited.
1-15 units, Aut (Wong, S), Win (Wong, S), Spr (Wong, S)
EE 398A. Image and Video Compression
Replaces EE398. The principles of source coding for the efficient
storage and transmission of still and moving images. Entropy and
lossless coding techniques. Run-length coding and fax compression.
Arithmetic coding. Rate-distortion limits and quantization.
Lossless and lossy predictive coding. Transform coding, JPEG.
Subband coding, wavelets, JPEG2000. Motion-compensated coding,
MPEG. Students investigate image and video compression
algorithms in Matlab or C. Term project. Prerequisites: 261, 278.
3 units, Win (Girod, B)
EE 398B. Image Communication II
Second of two-course series. Digital video communication techniques.
Interframe coding. Conditional replenishment. Motion538
| STANFORD BULLETIN, 2009-10
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION
compensated prediction. Motion-compensated hybrid coding. Motion
estimation. Rate distortion analysis and optimization of video
coding schemes. Advanced motion compensation techiques. Scalable
layered video representations. Error-resilient video coding.
Applications: videotelephony, videoconferencing, digital TV
broadcasting, Internet video streaming, wireless video. Standards:
MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, ITU-T, H.261, H.263, H264. Students
investigate video compression algorithms in Matlab or C.
Term project. Prerequisite: 398A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 400. Thesis and Thesis Research
Limited to candidates for the degree of Engineer or Ph.D.
1-15 units, Aut (Staff), Win (Staff), Spr (Staff), Sum (Staff)
EE 402A. Topics in International Technology Management
Theme for Autumn 2009 is: Technology Strategies in Asian Business.
Surveys distinctive practices of major corporations and startup
companies in Japan and Asia. Open and closed innovation, tech
licensing, R&D portfolio management, M&A for technology positioning
and more. Distinguished speakers from industry and government.
1 unit, Aut (Dasher, R)
EE 402S. Topics in International Advanced Technology Research
Theme for 2006-07 is advanced technologies for biomedical applications.
Photonic and electronic systems and components for imaging,
micro--arrays, drug delivery, artificial organs, and robotassisted
surgery. Guest speakers from industry, government, and
universities. May be repeated for credit. Recommended: basic
electronics.
1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)
EE 402T. Entrepreneurship in Asian High Tech Industries
Patterns and challenges of entrepreneurship in Asia. Business and
technology issues in start-up companies in Asian economies. Guest
speakers from industry, government, and universities. May be
repeated for credit.
1 unit, Spr (Dasher, R)
EE 410. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory
Fabrication, simulation, and testing of a highly simplified 1.5 micron
CMOS process developed for this course. Practical aspects of
IC fabrication including silicon wafer cleaning, photolithography,
etching, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapor
deposition, physical sputtering, and wafer testing. Students perform
simulations of the CMOS process using process simulator
TSUPREM4 of the structures and electrical parameters that should
result from the process flow in the lab. Taught in the Stanford Nanofabrication
Facility (SNF) in the Center for Integrated Systems
(CIS). Preference to students pursuing doctoral research program
requiring SNF facilities. Enrollment limited to 20. Prerequisites:
212, 216, consent of instructor.
3-4 units, Win (Saraswat, K)
EE 414. RF Transceiver Design Laboratory
Students design, build, and test GHz transceivers using microstrip
construction techniques and discrete components. The design,
construction, and experimental characterization of representative
transceiver building blocks: low noise amplifiers (LNAs), diode
ring mixers, PLL-based frequency synthesizers, voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs), power amplifiers (PAs), and microstrip filters
and patch antennas. The characteristics of passive microstrip components
(including interconnect). Emphasis is on a quantitative
reconciliation of theoretical predictions and extensive experimental
measurements performed with spectrum and network analyzers,
time-domain reflectometers (TDRs), noise figure meter and phase
noise analyzers. Prerequisites: 314, 344.
3 units, Win (Lee, T)
EE 418. Topics in Neuroengineering
Neuroscience and electrical engineering, focusing on principles
and theory in modern neural prosthetic systems (brain-computer or
brain-machine interfaces). Electrical properties of neurons, information
encoding, neural measurement techiques and technology,
processing electronics, information decoding and estimators, and
statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: 214, 278.
3 units, not given this year
EE 453. Geomagnetically Trapped Radiation
Research on the radiation belts of Earth and other planets. Physical
processes which lead to magnetic trapping of electrons and ions.
Analytical tools for trapped radiation research. The nature of radiation
belts, source and loss mechanisms, and the relation of radiation
belts to other geophysical phenomena.
3 units, not given this year
EE 469B. RF Pulse Design for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS)
based on the use of radio frequency pulses to manipulate magnetization.
Analysis and design of major types of RF pulses in one and
multiple dimensions, analysis and design of sequences of RF
pulses for fast imaging, and use of RF pulses for the creation of
image contrast in MRI. Prerequisite: 369B.
3 units, Aut (Pauly, J)
EE 477. Universal Schemes in Information Theory
Universal schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel
coding and decoding, prediction, denoising, and filtering. Characterization
of performance limitations in the stochastic settting:
entropy rate, rate-distortion function, channel capacity, Bayes
envelope for prediction, denoising, and filtering. Lempel-Ziv lossless
compression, and Lempel-Ziv based schemes for lossy compression,
channel coding, prediction, and filtering. Discrete universal
denoising. Compression-based approach to denoising. The
compound decision problem. Prerequisites: 278, 376A,B.
3 units, Aut (Staff)
EE 478. Topics in Multiple User Information Theory
Topics in multiple user source and channel coding; multiple access
channel, correlated source coding, broadcast channel, interference
channel, relay channel, and channels with feedback; asymptotic
capacity of networks; source coding with side information, multiple
descriptions, channels with state, MIMO channels. Prerequisite:
376A.
3 units, not given this year
EE 479. Multiuser Digital Transmission Systems
Multiuser communications design, modulation, and reception. Capacity
regions and fundamentally optimum designs for multiple
access, broadcast, and interference channels. Iterative waterfilling,
optimum spectrum balancing, band preference methods, vectoring,
and multi-user generalized decision feedback equalization (GDFE)
as used for vector broadcast and multiple access. Prerequisite: 379C.
3 units, not given this year
EE 492M. How Cyberspace Works
Introduction to information technology. The technical foundation
of bits and bytes, multimedia, and networks, using the web as a
starting point. Topics include representing information as bits and
bytes, digital music, images, video, computer graphics, and virtual
reality. Data compression, JPEG, MPEG audio, and video. Bandwidth
and sampling. Analog, digital, and wireless telephone systems.
Digital transmission and storage: modulation, error control;
cable, fiber, satellite, storage media. Broadcasting. GPS. Circuitversus
packet-switched networks, local-area networks, Ethernet,
Internet. Email, VoIP. Security: encryption, digital signatures,
digital certificates. Field-trip to a Silicon Valley information technology
company.
3 units, Win (Paulraj, A)