Orientation.
Electrical Engineering Courses
EE 10N. How Musical Instruments Work. 3 Units.
Musical instruments, as well as being fun to play, are excellent examples
of science, engineering, and the interplay between the two. How does an
instrument make sound? Why does a trumpet sound different from a guitar,
a flute, or a bell? We will examine the principles of operation of wind,
string, percussion, and electronic instruments hands-on in class. Concepts
to be investigated include waves, resonators, understanding and measuring
sound spectra and harmonic structure of instruments, engineering design of
instruments, the historical development of instruments, and the science and
engineering that make them possible. Prerequisites: high school math and
physics. Recommended: some experience playing a musical instrument.
EE 10SC. Mathematics of the Information Age. 2 Units.
The world may be made of earth, wind, fire, and water, but it runs on
information. What is information? How do we measure it, manipulate
it, send it, and protect it? Why has everything gone digital and what
does this mean? The mathematics of the Information Age is part of your
everyday life, from imaging to the Internet. We will discuss the elements
of information theory and how information is represented in different ways
for different purposes. We will work with the mathematical representation
of signals from the classical functions of trigonometry to the spectrum of a
general signal. This course will help you understand some of the profound
ways mathematics is used to shape and direct these aspects of the modern
world. There will be regular assignments, readings, a research project, and a
presentation on a topic of your choice that goes beyond the class material.
EE 14N. Things about Stuff. 3 Units.
Preference to freshmen. The stories behind disruptive inventions such
as the telegraph, telephone, wireless, television, transistor, and chip are
as important as the inventions themselves, for they elucidate broadly
applicable scientific principles. Focus is on studying consumer devices;
projects include building batteries, energy conversion devices and
semiconductors from pocket change. Students may propose topics and
projects of interest to them. The trajectory of the course is determined in
large part by the students themselves.
EE 15N. The Art and Science of Engineering Design. 3 Units.
The goal of this seminar is to introduce freshmen to the design process
associated with an engineering project. The seminar will consist of a series
of lectures. The first part of each lecture will focus on the different design
aspects of an engineering project, including formation of the design team,
developing a project statement, generating design ideas and specifications,
finalizing the design, and reporting the outcome. Students will form teams
to follow these procedures in designing a term project of their choice over
the quarter. The second part of each lecture will consist of outside speakers,
including founders of some of the most exciting companies in Silicon
Valley, who will share their experiences about engineering design. Onsite
visits to Silicon Valley companies to showcase their design processes
will also be part of the course. The seminar serves three purposes: (1) it
introduces students to the design process of turning an idea into a final
design, (2) it presents the different functions that people play in a project,
and (3) it gives students a chance to consider what role in a project would
be best suited to their interests and skills.
EE 17N. Engineering the Micro and Nano Worlds: From Chips to
Genes. 3 Units.
Preference to freshmen. The first part is hands-on micro- and nanofabrication
including the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF) and the
Stanford Nanocharacterization Laboratory (SNL) and field trips to local
companies and other research centers to illustrate the many applications;
these include semiconductor integrated circuits (’chips’), DNA microarrays,
microfluidic bio-sensors and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).
The second part is to create, design, propose and execute a project. Most
of the grade will be based on the project. By the end of the course you
will, of course, be able to read critically a New York Times article on
nanotechnology. More importantly you will have experienced the challenge
(and fun) of designing, carrying out and presenting your own experimental
project. As a result you will be better equipped to choose your major. This
course can complement (and differs from) the seminars offered by Profs
Philip Wong and Hari Manoharan in that it emphasizes laboratory work
and an experimental student-designed project. Prerequisites: high-school
physics.
Course Descriptions
910 Course Descriptions
EE 21N. What is Nanotechnology?. 3 Units.
Nanotechnology is an often used word and it means many things to
different people. Scientists and Engineers have some notion of what
nanotechnology is, societal perception may be entirely different. In this
course, we start with the classic paper by Richard Feynman ("There’s
Plenty of Room at the Bottom"), which laid down the challenge to the
nanotechnologists. Then we discuss two classic books that offer a glimpse
of what nanotechnology is: Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of
Nanotechnology by Eric Drexler, and Prey by Michael Crichton. Drexler’s
thesis sparked the imagination of what nano machinery might do, whereas
Crichton’s popular novel channeled the public’s attention to this subject by
portraying a disastrous scenario of a technology gone astray. We will use
the scientific knowledge to analyze the assumptions and predictions of these
classic works. We will draw upon the latest research advances to illustrate
the possibilities and impossibilities of nanotechnology.
EE 22N. Medical Imaging Systems. 3 Units.
Preference to freshmen. The technology of major imaging modalities
used for disease diagnosis: x-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance;
their history, societal impact, and clinical applications. Field trips to a
medical center and an imaging research lab. Term paper and presentation.
Prerequisites: high school physics and calculus.
EE 23N. Imaging: From the Atom to the Universe. 3 Units.
Preference to freshmen. Forms of imaging including human and animal
vision systems, atomic force microscope, microscope, digital camera,
holography and three-dimensional imaging, telescope, synthetic aperture
radar imaging, nuclear magnetic imaging, sonar and gravitational wave
imaging, and the Hubble Space telescope. Physical principles and exposure
to real imaging devices and systems.
EE 27N. Electronics Rocks. 3 Units.
Electronics pervades our lives, yet we often feel obliged to let a device
function as it was intended. This course is about not being intimidated by
voiding a warranty and modding some commercial gadget and about being
confident enough to build something cool from scratch. To get there, we
will study the basics of "how things work" and learn how to hack/mod and
scratch build. Students will be mentored and encouraged to work, in teams,
to play with interesting electronics and ultimately to develop a creative final
project.
EE 41. Physics of Electrical Engineering. 5 Units.
How everything from electrostatics to quantum mechanics is used
in common high-technology products. Electrostatics are critical in
micro-mechanical systems used in many sensors and displays, and
Electromagnetic waves are essential in all high-speed communication
systems. How to propagate energy on transmission lines, optical fibers,and
in free space. Which aspects of modern physics are needed to generate light
for the operation of a DVD player or TV. Introduction to semiconductors,
solid-state light bulbs, and laser pointers. Hands-on labs to connect physics
to everyday experience. Prerequisites: Physics 43
Same as: ENGR 40P.
EE 46. Engineering For Good: Save the World and Have Fun Doing It.
3 Units.
Projects that provide immediate and positive impact on the world. Focus
is on global health by learning from experts in this field. Students work
on real-world projects with help from members of NGOs and social
entrepreneurial companies as part of the hand-on learning experience.
Prerequisite: ENGR 40 or EE 122A or CS 106B or consent of instructor.
EE 47. Press Play: Interactive Device Design. 3 Units.
Introduction to the human-centered and technical workings behind
interactive devices ranging from cellphones and video controllers to smart
cars and appliances. Students build a working MP3 player prototype of
their own design, using embedded microcontrollers, digital audio decoders
and component sensors, and other electronic hardware. Topics include
electronics prototyping, interface prototyping, sensors and actuators, microcontroller
development, physical prototyping, and user testing. Prerequisite:
CS106A and X or consent of instructor.
EE 60N. Man versus Nature: Coping with Disasters Using Space
Technology. 4 Units.
Preference to freshman. Natural hazards, earthquakes, volcanoes, floods,
hurricanes, and fires, and how they affect people and society; great disasters
such as asteroid impacts that periodically obliterate many species of
life. Scientific issues, political and social consequences, costs of disaster
mitigation, and how scientific knowledge affects policy. How spaceborne
imaging technology makes it possible to respond quickly and mitigate
consequences; how it is applied to natural disasters; and remote sensing data
manipulation and analysis. GER:DB-EngrAppSci
Same as: GEOPHYS 60N.
EE 92A. Making and Breaking Things. 1 Unit.
This course will feature weekly visiting speakers who will guide class
members through the hands-on process of assembling or dissection novel
interactive devices and products. The course is meant to provide students
hands-on experience with component sensing and computing technologies,
a working knowledge of different materials and methods used in
modern-day prototyping and manufacture, and exposure to people en-gaged
in designing novel devices within the field of interactive device de-sign.
Activities will features a wide and evolving range of domains such as texile
sensors, hacking wireless radio, making LED light sculptures, taking apart
toys, shape deposition modeling and more.
EE 100. The Electrical Engineering Profession. 1 Unit.
Lectures/discussions on topics of importance to the electrical engineering
professional. Continuing education, professional societies, intellectual
property and patents, ethics, entrepreneurial engineering, and engineering
management.
EE 100A. Circuits and Signals Applications. 1 Unit.
This seminar course is intended to provide students with practical examples
of electronic circuits and related signal processing that can augment and
motivate the related courses such as: CME 102, EE 101A and EE 102A.
Any or all of these courses can be taken concurrently. The empha-sis will
be on the frequency- and time-domain behavior of circuits. The speakers
will demon-strate system-level, application-driven motivation for the
circuits and associated signal pro-cessing that will be discussed. The
detailed discussion will focus on examples of the first-order models and
analysis that in turn relates to the courses mentioned above.
EE 101A. Circuits I. 4 Units.
First of two-course sequence. Introduction to circuit modeling and analysis.
Topics include creating the models of typical components in electronic
circuits and simplifying non-linear models for restricted ranges of operation
(small signal model); and using network theory to solve linear and nonlinear
circuits under static and dynamic operations. Prerequisite: Physics 43.
EE 101B. Circuits II. 4 Units.
Second of two-course sequence. MOS large-signal and small-signal models.
MOS amplifier design including DC bias, small signal performance,
multistage amplifiers, frequency response, and feedback. Prerequisite:
EE101A, EE102A.
EE 102A. Signal Processing and Linear Systems I. 4 Units.
Concepts and mathematical tools in continuous-time signal processing and
linear systems analysis, illustrated with examples from signal processing,
communications, and control. Mathematical representation of signals and
systems. Linearity and time-invariance. System impulse and step response.
Frequency domain representations: Fourier series and Fourier transforms.
Filtering and signal distortion. Time/frequency sampling and interpolation.
Continuous-discrete time signal conversion and quantization.Stability and
causality in linear systems. Laplace transforms and Bode plots. Feedback
and control system design. Examples from filter design and linear control.
Prerequisite: MATH 53 or ENGR 155A.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 911
EE 102B. Signal Processing and Linear Systems II. 4 Units.
Concepts and mathematical tools in discrete-time signal processing and
linear systems analysis with examples from digital signal processing,
communications, and control. Discrete-time signal models. Continuousdiscrete-
continuous signal conversion. Discrete-time impulse and
step response. Frequency domain representations: Fourier series and
transforms. Connection between continuous and discrete time frequency
representations. Discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and fast Fourier
transform (FFT). Digital filter and signal processing examples. Discretetime
and hybrid linear systems. Stability and causality. Z transforms and
their connection to Laplace transforms. Frequency response of discrete-time
systems. Discrete-time control. Prerequisite: 102A.
EE 108A. Digital Systems I. 3-4 Units.
Digital circuit, logic, and system design. Digital representation of
information. CMOS logic circuits. Combinational logic design. Logic
building blocks, idioms, and structured design. Sequential logic design
and timing analysis. Clocks and synchronization. Finite state machines.
Microcode control. Digital system design. Control and datapath
partitioning. Lab. Undergraduates must enroll for 4 units. *In Autumn,
enrollment preference is given to EE majors.
EE 108B. Digital Systems II. 3-4 Units.
The design of processor-based digital systems. Instruction sets, addressing
modes, data types. Assembly language programming, low-level data
structures, introduction to operating systems and compilers. Processor
microarchitecture, microprogramming, pipelining. Memory systems
and caches. Input/output, interrupts, buses and DMA. System design
implementation alternatives, software/hardware tradeoffs. Labs involve the
design of processor subsystems and processor-based embedded systems.
Prerequisite: 108A, CS 106B.
EE 109. Digital Systems Design Lab. 4 Units.
The design of integrated digital systems encompassing both customized
software and hardware. Software/hardware design tradeoffs. Algorithm
design for pipelining and parallelism. System latency and throughput
tradeoffs. FPGA optimization techniques. Integration with external
systems and smart devices. Firmware configuration and embedded system
considerations. Enrollment limited to 25; preference to graduating seniors.
Prerequisites: 108B, and CS 106B or X.
EE 114. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Analysis and simulation of elementary transistor stages, current mirrors,
supply- and temperature-independent bias, and reference circuits. Overview
of integrated circuit technologies, circuit components, component variations
and practical design paradigms. Performance evaluation using computeraided
design tools. Prerequisite: 101B.GER:DB-EngrAppSci
Same as: EE 214A.
EE 116. Semiconductor Device Physics. 3 Units.
The fundamental operation of semiconductor devices and overview of
applications. The physical principles of semiconductors, both silicon
and compound materials; operating principles and device equations for
junction devices (diodes, bipolar transistor, photo-detectors). Introduction
to quantum effects and band theory of solids. Prerequisite: ENGR 40.
Corequisite: 101B.
EE 118. Introduction to Mechatronics. 4 Units.
Technologies involved in mechatronics (intelligent electro-mechanical
systems) and techniques to integrate these technologies into mechatronic
systems. Topics: electronics (A/D, D/A converters, op-amps, filters, power
devices); software program design (event-driven programming, state
machine based design); DC and stepper motors; basic sensing; mechanical
design (machine elements and mechanical CAD). Lab component of
structured assignments combined with large, open-ended team project.
Limited enrollment. Prerequisites: ENGR 40, and CS 106A or 106X.
EE 122A. Analog Circuits Laboratory. 3 Units.
Practical applications of analog circuits, including simple amplifiers, filters,
oscillators, power supplies, and sensors. Design skills, computer-aided
design, and circuit fabrication and debugging. The design process through
proposing, designing, simulating, building, debugging, and demonstrating
a project. Radio frequency and largely digital projects not suitable for EE
122. Prerequisite: ENGR 40 or equivalent and Laplace Transform working
knowledge.
EE 122B. Introduction to Biomedical Electronics. 3 Units.
Key components of modern systems, their application in physiology
measurements, and reduction to practice in labs. Fundamentals of
analog/digital conversion and filtering techniques for biosignals, typical
transducers (biopotential, electrochemical, temperature, pressure, acoustic,
movement), and interfacing circuits. Issues of biomedical electronics
(safety, noise). Prerequisite: EE122A or equivalent.
EE 124. Introduction to Neuroelectrical Engineering. 3 Units.
Fundamental properties of electrical activity in neurons, technology for
measuring and altering neural activity, and operating principles of modern
neurological and neural prosthetic medical systems. Topics: action potential
generation and propagation, neuro-MEMS and measurement systems,
experimental design and statistical data analysis, information encoding
and decoding, clinical diagnostic systems, and fully-implantable neural
prosthetic systems design. Prerequisite: EE 101A and EE 102A.
EE 133. Analog Communications Design Laboratory. 3-4 Units.
Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude modulation (AM) using
multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation (FM) based on discrete
oscillator and integrated modulator circuits such as voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop (PLL) techniques, characterization
of key parameters, and their applications. Practical aspects of circuit
implementations. Labs involve building and characterization of AM and
FM modulation/demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited
to 30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: EE101B.
Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and Graduate students enroll in
EE233. Recommended: EE114/214A.
Same as: EE 233.
EE 134. Introduction to Photonics. 4 Units.
Photonics, optical components, and fiber optics. Conceptual and
mathematical tools for design and analysis of optical communication,
sensor and imaging systems. Experimental characterization of
semiconductor lasers, optical fibers, photodetectors, receiver circuitry,
fiber optic links, optical amplifiers, and optical sensors. Class project on
confocal microscopy or other method of sensing or analyzing biometric
data. Laboratory experiments. Prerequisite: 41 or equivalent.
EE 136. Introduction to Nanophotonics and Nanostructures. 3 Units.
Electromagnetic and quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors.
Confining these waves, and devices employing such confinement.
Localization of light and applications: metallic mirrors, photonic crystals,
optical waveguides, microresonators, plasmonics. Localization of quantum
mechanical waves: quantum wells, wires, and dots. Generation of light in
semiconductors: spontaneous and stimulated emission, lasers, and light
emitting diodes. Devices incorporating localization of both electromagnetic
and quantum mechanical waves such as resonant cavity quantum well lasers
and microcavity-based single photon sources. System-level applications
such as optical communications, biochemical sensing, and quantum
cryptography. Prerequisite: basic familiarity with electromagnetic and
quantum mechanical waves and semiconductors at the level of EE 41 or
equivalent.
Course Descriptions
912 Course Descriptions
EE 141. Engineering Electromagnetics. 3 Units.
Lumped versus distributed circuits. Transient response of transmission
lines with resistive and reactive loads. Reflection, transmission, attenuation
and dispersion. Steady-state waves on transmission lines. Standing wave
ratio, impedance matching, and power flow. Coulomb’s law, electrostatic
field, potential and gradient, electric flux and Gauss’s Law and divergence.
Metallic conductors, Poisson’s and Laplace’s equations, capacitance,
dielectric materials. Electrostatic energy and forces. Steady electric
currents, Ohm’s Law, Kirchoff’s Laws, charge conservation and the
continuity equation, Joule’s Law. Biot-Savart’s law and the static magnetic
field. Ampere’s Law and curl. Vector magnetic potential and magnetic
dipole. Magnetic materials, forces and torques. Faraday’s Law, magnetic
energy, displacement current and Maxwell’s equations. Uniform plane
waves. Prerequisites: 102A, MATH 52.
EE 151. Sustainable Energy Systems. 3 Units.
Energy demand is expected to grow by 30% by 2025, while at the same
time the European Union is demanding a carbon footprint at 1990 levels.
We examine energy flow in the US and Europe, and deduce from it a
strategy for sustainable growth. Potential solutions include distributed small
scale networked energy generation, solar energy, wind and water, as well
as nuclear energy. A systems perspective allows optimization. Fundamental
concepts will be demonstrated in class through hands-on experiments.
EE 152. Green Electronics. 4 Units.
Many green technologies including hybrid cars, photovoltaic energy
systems, efficient power supplies, and energy-conserving control systems
have at their heart intelligent, high-power electronics. This course examines
this technology and uses green-tech examples to teach the engineering
principles of modeling, optimization, analysis, simulation, and design.
Topics include power converter topologies, periodic steady-state analysis,
control, motors and drives, photovol-taic systems, and design of magnetic
components. The course involves a hands-on laboratory and a substantial
final project. Required: EE101B, EE102A, EE108A. Recommended:
ENGR40 or EE122A.
EE 168. Introduction to Digital Image Processing. 3-4 Units.
Computer processing of digital 2-D and 3-D data, combining theoretical
material with implementation of computer algorithms. Topics: properties
of digital images, design of display systems and algorithms, time and
frequency representations, filters, image formation and enhancement,
imaging systems, perspective, morphing, and animation applications.
Instructional computer lab exercises implement practical algorithms. Final
project consists of computer animations incorporating techniques learned in
class. Prerequisite: Matlab programming.
EE 169. Introduction to Bioimaging. 3 Units.
Bioimaging is important for both clinical medicine, and medical research.
This course will provide a introduction to several of the major imaging
modalities, using a signal processing perspective. The course will start with
an introduction to multi-dimensional Fourier transforms, and image quality
metrics. It will then study projection imaging systems (projection X-Ray),
backprojection based systems (CT, PET, and SPECT), systems that use
beam forming (ultrasound), and systems that use Fourier encoding (MRI).
Prerequisites: EE102A, EE102B.
EE 178. Probabilistic Systems Analysis. 3-4 Units.
Introduction to probability and statistics and their role in modeling
and analyzing real world phenomena. Events, sample space, and
probability. Discrete random variables, probability mass functions,
independence and conditional probability, expectation and conditional
expectation. Continuous random variables, probability density functions,
independence and expectation, derived densities. Transforms, moments,
sums of independent random variables. Simple random processes. Limit
theorems. Introduction to statistics: significance, estimation and detection.
Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
Same as: EE 278A.
EE 179. Analog and Digital Communication Systems. 3 Units.
This course covers the fundamental principles underlying the analysis,
design and optimization of analog and digital communication systems.
Design examples will be taken from the most prevalent communication
systems today: cell phones, Wifi, radio and TV broadcasting, satellites, and
computer networks. Analysis techniques based on Fourier transforms and
energy/power spectral density will be developed. Mathematical models
for random variables and random (noise) signals will be presented, which
are used to characterize filtering and modulation of random noise. These
techniques will then be used to design analog (AM and FM) and digital
(PSK and FSK) communication systems and determine their performance
over channels with noise and interference. Prerequisite: 102A.
EE 190. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering. 1-15 Unit.
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual or
team activities involve lab experimentation, design of devices or systems, or
directed reading. Course may be repeated for credit.
EE 191. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering. 1-15
Unit.
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given for a letter
grade only. If a letter grade given on the basis of required written report or
examination is not appropriate, enroll in 190. Course may be repeated for
credit.
EE 191A. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering. 1 Unit.
EE191A is part of the Accelerated Calculus for Engineers program.
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member given for a letter
grade only. EE 191A counts as a Math one unit seminar course: it is this
unit that constitutes the ACE program.
EE 191W. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering. 3-10
Units.
WIM-version of EE 191. For EE students using special studiesnn(e.g.,
honors project, independent research project) to satisfy thennwriting-inmajor
requirement. A written report that has gone through revision with an
advisor is required. An advisor from the Writing Center is recommended.
Same as: WIM.
EE 202. Electrical Engineering in Biology and Medicine. 3 Units.
Open to all. Primarily biological in nature, introduction to the physiological
and anatomic aspects of medical instrumentation. Areas include patient
monitoring, imaging, medical transducers, the unique aspects of medical
electronic systems, the socio-economic impact of technology on medical
care, and the constraints unique to medicine. Prerequisite: familiarity with
circuit instrumentation techniques as in 101B.
EE 203. The Entrepreneurial Engineer. 1 Unit.
Seminar. For prospective entrepreneurs with an engineering background.
Contributions made to the business world by engineering graduates.
Speakers include Stanford and other engineering and M.B.A. graduates
who have founded large and small companies in nearby communities.
Contributions from EE faculty and other departments including Law,
Business, and MS&E.May be repeated for credit.
EE 204. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer
Scientists. 3 Units.
For graduate students with little or no business experience. Leading
computer, high-tech, and Silicon Valley companies and their best
practices. Tools and frameworks for analyzing decisions these companies
face. Corporate strategy, new product development, marketing, sales,
distribution, customer service, financial accounting, outsourcing, and
human behavior in business organizations. Case studies. Prerequisite:
graduate standing.
EE 204S. Business Management for Electrical Engineers and Computer
Scientists. 3 Units.
For SCPD students; see EE204.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 913
EE 212. Integrated Circuit Fabrication Processes. 3 Units.
For students interested in the physical bases and practical methods of
silicon VLSI chip fabrication, or the impact of technology on device
and circuit design, or intending to pursue doctoral research involving
the use of Stanford’s Nanofabrication laboratory. Process simulators
illustrate concepts. Topics: principles of integrated circuit fabrication
processes, physical and chemical models for crystal growth, oxidation, ion
implantation, etching, deposition, lithography, and back-end processing.
Required for 410.
EE 214A. Fundamentals of Analog Integrated Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Analysis and simulation of elementary transistor stages, current mirrors,
supply- and temperature-independent bias, and reference circuits. Overview
of integrated circuit technologies, circuit components, component variations
and practical design paradigms. Performance evaluation using computeraided
design tools. Prerequisite: 101B.GER:DB-EngrAppSci
Same as: EE 114.
EE 214B. Advanced Analog Integrated Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Analysis and design of analog integrated circuits in advanced MOS and
bipolar technologies. Device operation and compact modeling in support of
circuit simulations needed for design. Emphasis on quantitative evaluations
of performance using hand calculations and circuit simulations; intuitive
approaches to design. Analytical and approximate treatments of noise and
distortion; analysis and design of feedback circuits. Design of archetypal
analog blocks for networking and communications such as broadband gain
stages and transimpedance amplifiers. Prerequisites: EE114/214A.
EE 216. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices. 3 Units.
Carrier generation, transport, recombination, and storage in semiconductors.
Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction, heterojunction, metal
semiconductor contact, bipolar junction transistor, MOS capacitor, MOS
and junction field-effect transistors, and related optoelectronic devices such
as CCDs, solar cells, LEDs, and detectors. First-order device models that
reflect physical principles and are useful for integrated-circuit analysis and
design. Prerequisite: 116 or equivalent.
EE 222. Applied Quantum Mechanics I. 3 Units.
Emphasis is on applications in modern devices and systems. Topics
include: Schrödinger’s equation, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, solutions
of simple problems including quantum wells and tunneling, quantum
harmonic oscillator, coherent states, operator approach to quantum
mechanics, Dirac notation, angular momentum, hydrogen atom, calculation
techniques including matrix diagonalization, perturbation theory, variational
method, and time-dependent perturbation theory with applications to
optical absorption, nonlinear optical coefficients, and Fermi’s golden rule.
Prerequisites: MATH 52 and 53, PHYSICS 65 (or PHYSICS 43 and 45).
EE 223. Applied Quantum Mechanics II. 3 Units.
Continuation of 222, including more advanced topics: quantum mechanics
of crystalline materials, methods for one-dimensional problems, spin,
systems of identical particles (bosons and fermions), introductory quantum
optics (electromagnetic field quantization, coherent states), fermion
annihilation and creation operators, interaction of different kinds of
particles (spontaneous emission, optical absorption, and stimulated
emission). Quantum information and interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Other topics in electronics, optoelectronics, optics, and quantum
information science. Prerequisite: 222.
EE 225. Bio-chips, Imaging and Nanomedicine. 3 Units.
The course covers state-of-the-art and emerging bio-sensors, bio-chips,
imaging modalities, and nano-therapies which will be studied in the context
of human physiology including the nervous system, circulatory system and
immune system. Medical diagnostics will be divided into bio-chips (invitro
diagnostics) and medical and molecular imaging (in-vivo imaging).
In-depth discussion on cancer and cardiovascular diseases and the role of
diagnostics and nano-therapies.
Same as: MATSCI 382, SBIO 225.
EE 228. Basic Physics for Solid State Electronics. 3 Units.
Topics: energy band theory of solids, energy bandgap engineering, classical
kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, and equilibrium and non-equilibrium
semiconductor statistics. Prerequisite: course in modern physics.
EE 233. Analog Communications Design Laboratory. 3-4 Units.
Design, testing, and applications. Amplitude modulation (AM) using
multiplier circuits. Frequency modulation (FM) based on discrete
oscillator and integrated modulator circuits such as voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs). Phased-lock loop (PLL) techniques, characterization
of key parameters, and their applications. Practical aspects of circuit
implementations. Labs involve building and characterization of AM and
FM modulation/demodulation circuits and subsystems. Enrollment limited
to 30 undergraduates and coterminal EE students. Prerequisite: EE101B.
Undergraduate students enroll in EE133 and Graduate students enroll in
EE233. Recommended: EE114/214A.
Same as: EE 133.
EE 234. Photonics Laboratory. 3 Units.
Photonics and fiber optics with a focus on communication and sensing.
Experimental characterization of semiconductor lasers, optical fibers,
photodetectors, receiver circuitry, fiber optic links, optical amplifiers, and
optical sensors and photonic crystals. Prerequisite: EE 242 or equivalent.
Recommended: EE 236A.
EE 236A. Modern Optics. 3 Units.
Geometrical optics, aberrations, optical instruments, radiometry. Ray
matrices and Gaussian beams. Wave nature of light. Plane waves: at
interfaces, in media with varying refractive index. Diffraction and Fourier
optics. Interference, single-beam interferometers (Fabry-Perot), multiplebeam
interferometers (Michelson, Mach-Zehnder). Polarization, Jones and
Stokes calculi.nFormerly EE 268. Prerequisites: EE 141 or familiarity with
electromagnetism and plane waves.
EE 236AL. MODERN OPTICS - LABORATORY. 1 Unit.
The Laboratory Course allows students to work hands-on with optical
equipment to conduct five experiments that compliment the lecture course.
Examples are Gaussian Beams and Resonators, Interferometers, and
Diffraction.
EE 236B. Guided Waves. 3 Units.
Maxwell’s equations, constitutive relations. Kramers-Kronig relations.
Modes in waveguides: slab, rectangular, circular. Photonic crystals, surface
plasmon modes. General properties of waveguide modes: orthogonality,
phase and group indices, group velocity dispersion. Chirped pulse
propagation in dispersive media and its connection to Gaussian beam
propagation. Time lens. Waveguide technologies: glass, silicon, III-V
semiconductor, metallic. Waveguide devices: fibers, lasers, modulators,
arrayed waveguide gratings. Scattering matrix description of passive optical
devices, and constraints from energy conservation, time-reversal symmetry
and reciprocity. Mode coupling, directional couplers, distributed-feedback
structures. Resonators from scattering matrix and input-output perspective.
Micro-ring resonators.nnFormerly EE 235. Prerequisites: EE 236A and EE
242 or familiarity with differential form of Maxwell’s equations.
EE 236C. Lasers. 3 Units.
Atomic systems, spontaneous emission, stimulated emission, amplification.
Three- and four-level systems, rate equations, pumping schemes.
Laser principles, conditions for steady-state oscillation. Transverse
and longitudinal mode control and tuning. Exemplary laser systems:
gas (HeNe), solid state (Nd:YAG, Ti:sapphire) and semiconductors.
Elements of laser dynamics and noise. Formerly EE231. Prerequisites: EE
236B and familiarity with modern physics and semiconductor physics.
Recommended: EE 216 and EE 223 (either may be taken concurrently).
Course Descriptions
914 Course Descriptions
EE 237. Solar Energy Conversion. 3 Units.
Basics of solar energy conversion in photovoltaic devices. Solar cell
device physics: electrical and optical. Crystalline silicon, thin film and
multi-junction solar cells. Solar system issues including module assembly,
inverters, and micro-inverters. Concentrated solar power. Flip classroom
model is used supplementing classroom lectures with short videos. Guest
speakers include distinguished engineers, entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists actively engaged in solar industry. Recommended: EE116,
EE216.
EE 242. Electromagnetic Waves. 3 Units.
Continuation of 141. Maxwell’s equations. Plane waves in lossless and
lossy media. Skin effect. Flow of electromagnetic power (Poynting’s
theorem). Reflection and refraction of waves at planar boundaries. Snell’s
law and total internal reflection. Reflection and refraction from lossy media.
Guided waves. Parallel-plate and dielectric-slab waveguides. Hollow
wave-guides, cavity resonators, microstrip waveguides, optical fibers.
Interaction of fields with matter and particles. Antennas and radiation of
electromagnetic energy. Prerequisite: 141 or PHYSICS 120.
EE 243. Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices. 3 Units.
Semiconductor physics and optical processes in semiconductors. Operating
principles and practical device features of semiconductor optoelectronic
materials and heterostructures. Devices include: optical detectors (p-i-n,
avalanche, and MSM); light emitting diodes; electroabsorptive modulators
(Franz-Keldysh and QCSE), electrorefractive (directional couplers, Mach-
Zehnder), switches (SEEDs); and lasers (waveguide and vertical cavity
surface emitting). Prerequisites: semiconductor devices and solid state
physics such as EE 216 or equivalent.
EE 247. Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications. 3 Units.
Fibers: single- and multi-mode, attenuation, modal dispersion, groupvelocity
dispersion, polarization-mode dispersion. Nonlinear effects in
fibers: Raman, Brillouin, Kerr. Self- and cross-phase modulation, fourwave
mixing. Sources: light-emitting diodes, laser diodes, transverse
and longitudinal mode control, modulation, chirp, linewidth, intensity
noise. Modulators: electro-optic, electro-absorption. Photodiodes: p-in,
avalanche, responsivity, capacitance, transit time. Receivers: highimpedance,
transimpedance, bandwidth, noise. Digital intensity modulation
formats: non-return-to-zero, return-to-zero. Receiver performance: Q
factor, bit-error ratio, sensitivity, quantum limit. Sensitivity degradations:
extinction ratio, intensity noise, jitter, dispersion. Wavelength-division
multiplexing. System architectures: local-area, access, metropolitan-area,
long-haul. Prerequisites: 102A, 242 or consent of instructor.
EE 248. Fundamentals of Noise Processes. 3 Units.
Fundamentals of statistic, Fourier analysis, statistical and quantum
mechanics, and linear and nonlinear circuit theory. Thermal, quantum
and 1/f noise in resistors, pn junctions, lasers, and parametric amplifiers.
Energy efficiency (bit/photon) and spectral efficiency (bit/s/Hz) in coherent
and single photon optical communications. Protocols and security in
quantum cryptography. Decoherence of qubits in quantum computation.
Prerequisites: elementary device, circuit, and electromagnetic waves to the
level of 101A,B and 242.
EE 251. High-Frequency Circuit Design Laboratory. 3 Units.
Students will study the theory of operation of instruments such as the timedomain
reflectometer, sampling oscilloscope and vector network analyzer.
They will build on that theoretical foundation by designing, constructing
and characterizing numerous wireless building blocks in the upper-
UHF range (e.g., up to about 500MHz), in a running series of laboratory
exercises that conclude in a final project. Examples include impedancematching
and coupling structures, filters, narrowband and broadband
amplifiers, mixers/modulators, and voltage-controlled oscillators.
EE 252. Antenna Theory. 3 Units.
This course aims to cover the theory, simulation, and hands-on experiment
in antenna design. Topics include: basic parameters to describe the
performance and characteristics of an antenna, link budget analyses,
solving the fields from a Hertizian dipole, duality, equivalence principle,
reciprocity, linear wire antenna, circular loop antenna, antenna array, slot
and patch antennas, helical antennas, wideband antennas, size reduction
techniques, wideband small antennas, and circularly polarized (CP)
small antennas. Students will learn to use a commercial electromagnetic
stimulator in lab sessions. A final project is designed to solve a research
antenna design problem in biomedical area or wireless communications.
Prerequisite: EE 141 or Physics 120 or equivalent. Enrollment capacity
limited to 25 students.
EE 252E. Electrical Systems Practicum. 1 Unit.
Electrical Systems comprise anywhere from 10% to 50% of an overall
project cost. This class will provide you with an overview of various
systems installed in today’s built environment including power, lighting,
and special systems (Tel/Data, Wireless, RFID, Life Safety Systems, etc).
Industry experts will discuss the latest trends in Data Centers and power
generation (solar, wind, and natural gas). Also included is a review of basic
electrical materials, installation methods, cost analysis and metrics, as well
as management and estimating processes; all geared toward the construction
management professional.
Same as: CEE 252E.
EE 256. Numerical Electromagnetics. 3 Units.
Principles and applications of numerical techniques for solving practical
electromagnetics problems. Time domain solutions of Maxwell’s equations.
Finite difference time domain (FDTD) methods. Numerical stability,
dispersion, and dissipation. Absorbing boundary conditions. Perfectly
matched layer methods. Explicit and implicit methods. FDTD modeling of
propagation and scattering in dispersive and anisotropic media. Near-to-farzone
transformations. Computational problems require programming and
use of MATLAB and other tools. Prerequisite: EE 242 or equivalent.
EE 257. Applied Optimization Laboratory (Geophys 258). 3-4 Units.
Application of optimization and estimation methods to the analysis and
modeling of large observational data sets. Laboratory exercises using
inverse theory and applied linear algebra to solve problems of indirect
and noisy measurements. Emphasis on practical solution of scientific
and engineering problems, especially those requiring large amounts of
data, on digital computers using scientific languages. Also addresses
advantages of large-scale computing, including hardware architectures,
input/output and data bus bandwidth, programming efficiency, parallel
programming techniques. Student projects involve analyzing real data
by implementing observational systems such as tomography for medical
and Earth observation uses, radar and matched filtering, multispectral/
multitemporal studies, or migration processing. Prequisites: Programming
with high level language. Recommended: EE261, EE263, EE178/278A,
ME300 or equivalent.
Same as: GEOPHYS 258.
EE 261. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications. 3 Units.
The Fourier transform as a tool for solving physical problems. Fourier
series, the Fourier transform of continuous and discrete signals and its
properties. The Dirac delta, distributions, and generalized transforms.
Convolutions and correlations and applications; probability distributions,
sampling theory, filters, and analysis of linear systems. The discrete Fourier
transform and the FFT algorithm. Multidimensional Fourier transform and
use in imaging. Further applications to optics, crystallography. Emphasis
is on relating the theoretical principles to solving practical engineering and
science problems. Prerequisites: Math through ODEs, basic linear algebra,
Comfort with sums and discrete signals, Fourier series at the level of 102A.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 915
EE 262. Two-Dimensional Imaging. 3 Units.
Time and frequency representations, two-dimensional auto- and crosscorrelation,
Fourier spectra, diffraction and antennas, coordinate systems
and the Hankel and Abel transforms, line integrals, impulses and sampling,
restoration in the presence of noise, reconstruction and tomography,
imaging radar. Tomographic reconstruction using projection-slice and
layergarm methods. Students create software to form images using these
techniques with actual data. Final project consists of design and simulation
of an advanced imaging system. Prerequisite: EE261. Recommended:
EE278B, EE279.
EE 263. Introduction to Linear Dynamical Systems. 3 Units.
Applied linear algebra and linear dynamical systems with application to
circuits, signal processing, communications, and control systems. Topics:
least-squares approximations of over-determined equations and least-norm
solutions of underdetermined equations. Symmetric matrices, matrix norm,
and singular value decomposition. Eigenvalues, left and right eigenvectors,
with dynamical interpretation. Matrix exponential, stability, and asymptotic
behavior. Multi-input/multi-output systems, impulse and step matrices;
convolution and transfer matrix descriptions. Control, reachability, and
state transfer; observability and least-squares state estimation. Prerequisites:
linear algebra and matrices as in MATH 103; differential equations and
Laplace transforms as in EE 102A.
Same as: CME 263.
EE 264. Digital Signal Processing. 3 Units.
The fundamentals of digital signal processing techniques and their
applications. Topics include review of two sided Z-transform, linear
time invariant discrete-time systems, and sampling theory; A/D and D/A
conversion, rate conversion, and oversampling techniques for ADC and
DAC; filter design; quantization in digital filter implementation; discrete
Fourier analysis; and parametric signal modeling. Prerequisite: EE102A and
EE102B . Recommended: EE261, EE278B.
EE 265. Digital Signal Processing Laboratory. 3-4 Units.
Applying 102A,B to real-world signal processing applications. Lab
exercises use a programmable DSP to implement signal processing tasks.
Topics: A/D conversion and quantization, sampling theorem, Z-transform,
discrete-time Fourier transform, digital filter design and implementation,
spectral analysis, rate conversion, wireless data communication, and OFDM
receiver design. Prerequisites: 102A,B. Recommended: 261.
EE 271. Introduction to VLSI Systems. 3 Units.
Provides a quick introduction to MOS transistors and IC fabrication and
then creates abstractions to allow you to create and reason about complex
digital systems. It uses a switch resistor model of a transistor, uses it
to model gates, and then shows how gates and physical layout can be
synthesized from Verilog or SystemVerilog descriptions. Most of the
class will be spent on providing techniques to create designs that can be
validated, are low power, provide good performance, and can be completed
in finite time. Prerequisites: 101A, 108A and 108B; familiarity with
transistors, logic design, Verilog and digital system organization.
EE 272. Design Projects in VLSI Systems. 3-4 Units.
An introduction to mixed signal design. Working in teams you will create
a small mixed-signal VLSI design using a modern design flow and CAD
tools. The project involves writing a Verilog model of the chip, creating a
testing/debug strategy for your chip, wrapping custom layout to fit into a std
cell system, using synthesis and place and route tools to create the layout of
your chip, and understanding all the weird stuff you need to do to tape-out a
chip. Useful for anyone who will build a chip in their Ph.D. Pre-requsiites:
EE271 and experience in digital/analog circuit design.
EE 273. Digital Systems Engineering. 3 Units.
Electrical issues in the design of high-performance digital systems,
including signaling, timing, synchronization, noise, and power distribution.
High-speed signaling methods; noise in digital systems, its effect on
signaling, and methods for noise reduction; timing conventions; timing
noise (skew and jitter), its effect on systems, and methods for mitigating
timing noise; synchronization issues and synchronizer design; clock and
power distribution problems and techniques; impact of electrical issues
on system architecture and design. Prerequisites: EE101A and EE108A.
Recommended: EE114/214A.
EE 278A. Probabilistic Systems Analysis. 3-4 Units.
Introduction to probability and statistics and their role in modeling
and analyzing real world phenomena. Events, sample space, and
probability. Discrete random variables, probability mass functions,
independence and conditional probability, expectation and conditional
expectation. Continuous random variables, probability density functions,
independence and expectation, derived densities. Transforms, moments,
sums of independent random variables. Simple random processes. Limit
theorems. Introduction to statistics: significance, estimation and detection.
Prerequisites: basic calculus and linear algebra.
Same as: EE 178.
EE 278B. Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing. 3 Units.
Review of basic probability and random variables. Random vectors and
processes; convergence and limit theorems; IID, independent increment,
Markov, and Gaussian random processes; stationary random processes;
autocorrelation and power spectral density; mean square error estimation,
detection, and linear estimation. Prerequisites: EE178/278A and linear
systems and Fourier transforms at the level of EE102A,B or EE261.
EE 279. Introduction to Digital Communication. 3 Units.
Digital communication is a rather unique field in engineering in which
theoretical ideas have had an extraordinary impact on the design of
actual systems. The course provides a basic understanding of the analysis
and design of digital communication systems, building on various
ideas from probability theory, stochastic processes, linear algebra and
Fourier analysis. Topics include: detection and probability of error
for binary and M-ary signals (PAM, QAM, PSK), receiver design and
sufficient statistics, controlling the spectrum and the Nyquist criterion,
bandpass communication and up/down conversion, design trade-offs: rate,
bandwidth, power and error probability, coding and decoding (block codes,
convolutional coding and Viterbi decoding). Prerequisites: 179 or 261, and
178 or 278.
EE 282. Computer Systems Architecture. 3 Units.
Course focuses on how to build modern computing systems, namely
notebooks, smartphones, and data centers, covering primarily their
hardware architecture and certain system software aspects. For each system
class, we cover the system architecture, processor technology, advanced
memory hierarchy and I/O organization, power and energy management,
and reliability. We will also cover topics such as interactions with system
software, virtualization, solid state storage, and security. The programming
assignments allow students to explore performance/energy tradeoffs
when using heterogeneous hardware resources on smartphone devices.
Prerequisite: EE108B. Recommended: CS 140.
EE 284. Introduction to Computer Networks. 3 Units.
Structure and components of computer networks; functions and services;
packet switching; layered architectures; OSI reference model; physical
layer; data link layer; error control; window flow control; media access
control protocols used in local area networks (Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI)
and satellite networks; network layer (datagram service, virtual circuit
service, routing, congestion control, Internet Protocol); transport layer
(UDP, TCP); application layer.
Course Descriptions
916 Course Descriptions
EE 290A. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers. 1
Unit.
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study.
Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, EE MS and PhD students
who have received a Satisfactory ("S") grade in EE290A; for 290C, EE PhD
degree candidacy and an "S" grade in EE 290B; for 290D, EE PhD degree
candidacy, an "S" grade in EE 290C and instructor consent.
EE 290B. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers. 1
Unit.
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study.
Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, EE MS and PhD students
who have received a Satisfactory ("S") grade in EE290A; for 290C, EE PhD
degree candidacy and an "S" grade in EE 290B; for 290D, EE PhD degree
candidacy, an "S" grade in EE 290C and instructor consent.
EE 290C. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers. 1
Unit.
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study.
Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, EE MS and PhD students
who have received a Satisfactory ("S") grade in EE290A; for 290C, EE PhD
degree candidacy and an "S" grade in EE 290B; for 290D, EE PhD degree
candidacy, an "S" grade in EE 290C and instructor consent.
EE 290D. Curricular Practical Training for Electrical Engineers. 1
Unit.
For EE majors who need work experience as part of their program of study.
Final report required. Prerequisites: for 290B, EE MS and PhD students
who have received a Satisfactory ("S") grade in EE290A; for 290C, EE PhD
degree candidacy and an "S" grade in EE 290B; for 290D, EE PhD degree
candidacy, an "S" grade in EE 290C and instructor consent.
EE 292B. Micro and Nanoscale Biosensing for Molecular Diagnostics. 3
Units.
The course covers state-of-the-art and emerging bio-sensors, biochips,
microfluidics, which will be studied in the context of molecular diagnostics.
Students will briefly learn the relevant biology, biochemistry, and
molecular biology pertinent to molecular diag-nostics. Students will
also become equipped with a thorough understanding of the interfaces
between electronics, fluidics, and molecular biology. Topics will include
microfluidics and mass transfer limits, electrode-electrolyte interfaces,
electrochemical noise processes, biosensor system level characterization,
determination of performance parameters such as throughput, detection
limit, and cost, integration of sensor with microfluidics, and electronic
readout circuitry architectures. Emphasis will be placed on in-depth
quantitative design of biomolecular sensing platforms.
EE 292C. Chemical Vapor Deposition and Epitaxy for Integrated
Circuits and Nanostructures. 1 Unit.
Fundamental aspects of CVD are initially considered, first focusing on
processes occurring in the gas phase and then on those occurring on
the surface. Qualitative understanding is emphasized, with minimal use
of equations. Adding energy both thermally and by using a plasma is
discussed; atomic-layer deposition is briefly considered. Examples of CVD
equipment are examined. The second portion of the tutorial examines layers
deposited by CVD. The focus is on group IV semiconductors ¿ especially
epitaxial and heteroepitaxial deposition, in which the crystal structure of
the depositing layer is related to that of the substrate. Polycrystalline silicon
and the IC interconnect system are then discussed. Finally, the use of highdensity
plasmas for rapid gap filling is contrasted with alternative CVD
dielectric deposition processes.
EE 292H. Engineering and Climate Change. 1 Unit.
This seminar series equips students and professionals with tools to apply
the engineering mindset to problems that stem from climate change, so
that they may consider and evaluate possible interventional, remedial
and adaptive approaches. This is not a crash course on climate change
(established climate experts are better equipped for that), nor is it a
crash course in policy; instead the series focuses on discovering and
exploring climate problems that seem most likely to benefit from adding the
engineering mindset as solutions are considered.nnEach week, Dr. Leslie
Field and/or an expert guest speaker will deliver an introductory lecture in
his/her area of expertise to set the framework in terms of climate, energy,
resource, policy and public opinion, and explore some of the problems that
seem most amenable to engineering input. Class members are asked to read
up on each week¿s lecture topic before class, to submit questions before
each lecture, and to submit at brief summary of some key points on the
topic following each lecture. May be repeated for credit.
EE 292I. Insanely Great Products: How do they get built?. 1 Unit.
Great products emerge from a sometimes conflict-laden process of
collaboration between different functions within companies. This Seminar
seeks to demystify this process via case-studies of successful products
and companies. Engineering management and businesspeople will share
their experiences in discussion with students. Previous companies profiled:
Apple, Intel, Facebook, and Genentech -- to name a few. Previous guests
include: Jon Rubinstein (NeXT, Apple, Palm), Ariel Braunstein (Flip
Video), and Charlie Cheever (Facebook, Quora). Pre-requisites: None.
EE 292J. Power Electronics. 3 Units.
All electronics need power from somewhere, which means the applications
of power electronics are everywhere. In this practical introduction to
power electronics we discuss both power conversion topologies--rectifiers,
switching converters, and inverters; and the details needed to get power
circuits to work--magnetic design, thermal management, and control.
Includes guest lectures from industry, and a field trip to the SLAC National
Accelerator Laboratory to demonstrate some truly inspiring power
converters. Prerequisites: EE 114.
EE 292K. Intelligent Energy Projects. 3 Units.
Energy systems must have the intelligence to cope with rapid changes in
energy supply, demand, distribution, and storage. This course is a project
course focusing on a selected areas of intelligent energy systems: Demand
Response, Optimal Power Flow and Locational Marginal Pricing, energy
systems monitoring, control analysis of distribution systems, and associated
system architecture. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Basic probability
(EE 278B), optimization (EE 364A), Matlab and C++ programming.
Experience with cvx a plus.
EE 292L. Nanomanufacturing. 3 Units.
Fundamentals of nanomanufacturing technology and applications. Topics
include recent developments in process technology, lithography and
patterning. Technology for FinFET transistors, NAND flash and 3D chips.
Manufacturing of LEDs, thin film and crystalline solar cells. Flip classroom
model is used supplementing classroom lectures with short videos. Guest
speakers include distinguished engineers, entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists actively engaged in nanomanufacturing. Prerequisite: background
in device physics and process technology. Recommended: EE116, EE216,
EE212.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 917
EE 292M. Parallel Processors Beyond Multi-Core Processing. 2 Units.
The current parallel computing research emphasizes multi-cores, but
there are alterna-tive array processors with significant potential. This
hands-on seminar focuses on SIMD (Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data)
massively parallel processors, with weekly programming assignments.
Topics: Flynn’s Taxonomy, parallel architectures, the K-SIMD simulator,
principles of SIMD programming, parallel sorting with sorting networks,
string comparison with dynamic programming (edit distance, Smith-
Waterman), arbitrary-precision operations with fixed-point numbers,
reductions, vector and matrix multiplication, asynchronous algorithms on
SIMD ("SIMD Phase Programming Model"), Mandelbrot set, analysis of
parallel performance. Prerequisites: EE108B and EE282. Recommended:
CS140.
EE 292P. Power Management Integrated Circuits. 3 Units.
Analysis of power management architectures and circuits in CMOS VLSI
technology. Circuit-level design of integrated linear voltage regulators and
highly-efficient switching power converters. Overview of significant topics:
high-frequency converters, switched capacitor converters, battery chargers,
digital control and layout of power converters. Prerequisite: EE214A or
equivalent.
EE 292T. SmartGrids and Advanced Power Systems Seminar. 1-2 Unit.
A series of seminar and lectures focused on power engineering. Renowned
researchers from universities and national labs will deliver bi-weekly
seminars on the state of the art of power system engineering. Seminar topics
may include: power system analysis and simulation, control and stability,
new market mechanisms, computation challenges and solutions, detection
and estimation, and the role of communications in the grid. The instructors
will cover relevant background materials in the in-between weeks. The
seminars are planned to continue throughout the next academic year, so the
course may be repeated for credit.
Same as: CEE 272T.
EE 293A. Solar Cells, Fuel Cells, and Batteries: Materials for the
Energy Solution. 3-4 Units.
Operating principles and applications of emerging technological solutions
to the energy demands of the world. The scale of global energy usage and
requirements for possible solutions. Basic physics and chemistry of solar
cells, fuel cells, and batteries. Performance issues, including economics,
from the ideal device to the installed system. The promise of materials
research for providing next generation solutions. Undergraduates register in
156 for 4 units; graduates register in 256 for 3 units.
Same as: ENERGY 293A, MATSCI 156, MATSCI 256.
EE 293B. Fundamentals of Energy Processes. 3 Units.
For seniors and graduate students. Covers scientific and engineering
fundamentals of renewable energy processes involving heat.
Thermodynamics, heat engines, solar thermal, geothermal, biomass.
Recommended: MATH 41, 43; PHYSICS 41, 43, 45
Same as: ENERGY 293B.
EE 300. Master’s Thesis and Thesis Research. 1-15 Unit.
Independent work under the direction of a department faculty. Written
thesis required for final letter grade. The continuing grade ’N’ is given
in quarters prior to thesis submission. See 390 if a letter grade is not
appropriate. Course may be repeated for credit.
EE 303. Autonomous Implantable Systems. 3 Units.
Integrating electronics with sensing, stimulation, and locomotion
capabilities into the body will allow us to restore or enhance physiological
functions. In order to be able to insert these electronics into the body,
energy source is a major obstacle. This course focuses on the analysis and
design of wirelessly powered catheter-deliverable electronics. Emphases
will be on the interaction between human and electromagnetic fields in
order to transfer power to the embedded electronics via electromagnetic
fields, power harvesting circuitry, electrical-tissue interface, and sensing
and actuating frontend designs. Prerequisites: EE 252 or equivalent.
EE 304. Neuromorphics: Brains in Silicon. 3 Units.
This course introduces neuromorphic system design, starting at the device
level, going through the circuit level, and ending up at the system level.
At the device level, it covers MOS transistor operation in the subthreshold
region. At the circuit level, it covers silicon neuron and synapse design. And
at the system level, it covers to reroutable interconnection. At the end of the
course, you will understand how various neuromorphic architectures¿ area
and energy use scale with network size.
EE 309. Semiconductor Memory Devices and Technology. 3 Units.
The functionality and performance of ULSI systems are increasingly
dependent upon the characteristics of the memory subsystem. This course
introduces the student to various memory devices: SRAM, DRAM,
NVRAM (non-volatile memory). This course will cover various aspects
of semiconductor memories, including basic operation principles, device
design considerations, device scaling, device fabrication, memory array
addressing and readout circuits. Various cell structures (e.g. 1T-1C, 6T,
4T, 1T-1R, 0T-1R, 1S-1R, floating gate FLASH, SONOS, NROM), and
memory organization (open bit-line, folded bit-line, NAND, NOR, crosspoint
etc.). This course will include a survey of new memory concepts
(e.g. magnetic tunnel junction memory (MRAM, SST-RAM), ferroelectric
memory (FRAM), phase change memory (PCM), metal oxide resistive
switching memory (RRAM), nanoconductive bridge memory (CBRAM)).
Offered Alternate years. Pre-requisite: EE 216. Preferred: EE 316.
EE 310. Integrated Circuits Technology and Design Seminar. 1 Unit.
State-of-the-art micro- and nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, advanced
materials, and nanoscience for device applications. Prerequisites: EE216,
EE316.May be repeated for credit.
EE 311. Advanced Integrated Circuits Technology. 3 Units.
What are the practical and fundamental limits to the evolution of
the technology of modern MOS devices and interconnects? How are
modern devices and circuits fabricated and what future changes are
likely? Advanced techniques and models of MOS devices and back-end
(interconnect and contact) processing. What are future device structures and
materials to maintain progress in integrated electronics? MOS front-end and
back-end process integration. Prerequisites: EE212, EE216 or equivalent.
EE 313. Digital MOS Integrated Circuits. 3 Units.
Looks a little more deeply at how digital circuits operate, what makes a
gate digital, and how to "cheat" to improve performance or power. To aid
this analysis we create a number of different models for MOS transistors
and choose the simplest one that can explain our the circuit’s operation,
using both hand and computer analysis. We explore static, dynamic,
pulse-mode, and current mode logic, and show how they are are used
in SRAM design. Topics include sizing for min delay, noise and noise
margins, power dissipation. The class uses memory design (SRAM) as a
motivating example. DRAM and EEPROM design issues are also covered.
Prerequisites: 101B, 108A. Recommended: 271.
EE 314A. RF Integrated Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Design of RF integrated circuits for communications systems, primarily in
CMOS. Topics: the design of matching networks and low-noise amplifiers
at RF, mixers, modulators, and demodulators; review of classical control
concepts necessary for oscillator design including PLLs and PLL-based
frequency synthesizers. Design of low phase noise oscillators. Design
of high-efficiency (e.g., class E, F) RF power amplifiers, coupling
networks. Behavior and modeling of passive and active components at RF.
Narrowband and broadband amplifiers; noise and distortion measures and
mitigation methods. Overview of transceiver architectures. Prerequisite:
EE214B.
Course Descriptions
918 Course Descriptions
EE 314B. Advanced RF Integrated Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Analysis and design of modern communication circuits and systems with
emphasize on design techniques for high-frequency (into mm-wave) ICs.
Topics include MOS, bipolar, and BiCMOS high-frequency integrated
circuits, including power amplifiers, extremely wideband amplifiers,
advanced oscillators, phase-locked loops and frequency-translation
circuits. Design techniques for mm-wave silicon ICs (on-chip low-loss
transmissions lines, unilateralization techniques, in-tegrated antennas,
harmonic generation, etc) will also be studied. Prerequisite: EE314A.
EE 315A. VLSI Signal Conditioning Circuits. 3 Units.
Design and analysis of integrated circuits for active filters, precision gain
stages, and sensor interfaces in CMOS VLSI technology. Operational
transconductance amplifiers; sampled-data and continuous-time analog
filters. Analysis of noise and amplifier imperfections; compensation
techniques such as correlated double sampling. Sensor interfaces for microelectromechanical
and biomedical applications. Layout techniques for
analog integrated circuits. Prerequisites: EE214B.
EE 315B. VLSI Data Conversion Circuits. 3 Units.
Architectural and circuit level design and analysis of integrated analogto-
digital and digital-to-analog interfaces in CMOS VLSI technology.
Fundamental circuit elements such as sampling circuits and voltage
comparators. Circuits and architectures for Nyquist-rate and oversampling
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion; digital decimation and
interpolation filters. Examples of calibration and digital enhancement
techniques. Prerequisite: EE 214B. Recommended: EE 315A.
EE 316. Advanced VLSI Devices. 3 Units.
In modern VLSI technologies, device electrical characteristics are sensitive
to structural details and therefore to fabrication techniques. How are
advanced VLSI devices designed and what future changes are likely? What
are the implications for device electrical performance caused by fabrication
techniques? Physical models for nanometer scale structures, control of
electrical characteristics (threshold voltage, short channel effects, ballistic
transport) in small structures, and alternative device structures for VLSI.
Prerequisites: 212 and 216, or equivalent.
EE 319. Advanced Nanoelectronic Devices and Technology. 3 Units.
Recent advances in materials science, device physics and structures, and
processing technology, to extend VLS1 device scaling towards atomistic
and quantum-mechanical physics boundaries. Topics include: mobilityenhancement
techniques; nanomaterial structures including tube, wire,
beam, and crystal; conducting polymer; 3D FET; gate-wraparound
FET; nonvolatile memory phenomena and devices; self-assembly; flash
annealing; plasma doping; and nano pattering. Prerequisites: 216, 316.
EE 320. Nanoelectronics. 3 Units.
This course covers the device physics and operation principles of
nanoelectric devices, with a focus on devices for energy-efficient
computation. Topics covered include devices based on new nanomaterials
such as carbon nanotubes, semiconductor nanowires, and 2D
layered materials such as graphene; non-FET based devices such as
nanoelectromechanical (NEM) relay, single electron transistors (SET) and
resonant tunneling diodes (RTD); as well as FET-based devices such as
tunnel FET. Devices targeted for both logic and memory applications are
covered. Prerequisites: Undergraduate device physics, EE222, EE216,
EE316. Recommended courses: EE223, EE228, EE311.
EE 327. Properties of Semiconductor Materials. 3 Units.
Modern semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are based on unique
energy band, carrier transport, and optical properties of semiconductor
materials. How to choose these properties for operation of semiconductor
devices. Emphasis is on quantum mechanical foundations of the properties
of solids, energy bandgap engineering, semi-classical transport theory,
semi-conductor statistics, carrier scattering, electro-magneto transport
effects, high field ballistic transport, Boltzmann transport equation,
quantum mechanical transitions, optical absorption, and radiative and nonradiative
recombination that are the foundations of modern transistors and
optoelectronic devices. Prerequisites: EE216 or equivalent.
EE 328. Physics of Advanced Semiconductor Devices. 3 Units.
Principles governing the operation of modern semiconductor devices.
Assumptions and approximations commonly made in analyzing
devices. Emphasis is on the application of semiconductor physics to the
development of advanced semiconductor devices such as heterojunctions,
HJ-bipolar transistors, HJ-FETs, nanostructures, tunneling, single electron
transistor and photonic devices. Use of SENTARUS, a 2-D Poisson solver,
for simulation of ultra-small devices. Examples related to state-of-the-art
devices and current device research. Prerequisite: 216. Recommended: 316.
EE 329. The Electronic Structure of Surfaces and Interfaces. 3 Units.
Physical concepts and phenomena for surface science techniques
probing the electronic and chemical structure of surfaces, interfaces
and nanomaterials. Microscopic and atomic models of microstructures;
applications including semiconductor device technology, catalysis and
energy. Physical processes of UV and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy,
Auger electron spectroscopy, surface EXAFS, low energy electron
diffraction, electron/photon stimulated ion desorption, scanning tunneling
spectroscopy, ion scattering, energy loss spectroscopy and related imaging
methods; and experimental aspects of these surface science techniques.
Prerequisites: PHYSICS 70 and MATSCI 199/209, or consent of instructor.
Same as: PHOTON 329.
EE 331. Biophotonics: Light in Medicine and Biology. 3 Units.
Current topics and trends in the use of light in medicine and for advanced
microscopy. Course begins with a review of relevant optical principles
(basic physics required). Key topics include: light-tissue interactions;
sensing and spectroscopy; contrast-enhanced imaging; super-resolution and
label-free microscopy; medical applications of light for diagnostics, in-vivo
imaging, and therapy; nanophotonics and array technologies. Open to nonmajors;
programming experience (Matlab and/or C) required.
EE 332. Laser Dynamics. 3 Units.
Dynamic and transient effects in lasers including spiking, Q-switching,
mode locking, frequency modulation, frequency and spatial mode
competition, linear and nonlinear pulse propagation, pulse shaping.
Formerly EE 232. Prerequisite: 236C.
EE 334. Micro and Nano Optical Device Design. 3 Units.
Lecture and project course on design and analysis of optical devices
with emphasis on opportunities and challenges created by scaling to the
micrometer and nanometer ranges. The emphasis is on fundamentals,
combined with some coverage of practical implementations. Prerequisite:
EE 242 or equivalent.
EE 336. Nanophotonics. 3 Units.
Recent developments in micro- and nanophotonic materials and devices.
Basic concepts of photonic crystals. Integrated photonic circuits.
Photonic crystal fibers. Superprism effects. Optical properties of metallic
nanostructures. Sub-wavelength phenomena and plasmonic excitations.
Meta-materials. Prerequisite: Electromagnetic theory at the level of 242.
Same as: MATSCI 346.
EE 340. Optical Micro- and Nano-Cavities. 3 Units.
Optical micro- and nano-cavities and their device applications. Types
of optical cavities (microdisks, microspheres, photonic crystal cavities,
plasmonic cavities), and their electromagnetic properties, design, and
fabrication techniques. Cavity quantum electrodynamics: strong and weakcoupling
regime, Purcell factor, spontaneous emission control. Applications
of optical cavities, including low-threshold lasers, optical modulators,
quantum information processing devices, and bio-chemical sensors.
Prerequisites: Advanced undergraduate or basic graduate level knowledge
of electromagnetics, quantum.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 919
EE 345. Optical Fiber Communication Laboratory. 3 Units.
Experimental techniques in optical fiber communications and networking.
Experimental investigation of key optical communications components
including fibers, lasers, modulators, photodiodes, optical amplifiers,
and WDM multiplexers and demultiplexers. Fundamental optical
communications systems techniques: eye diagrams, BER measurements,
experimental evaluation of nonlinearties. Prerequisites: Undergraduate
physics and optics.
EE 346. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics. 3 Units.
Wave propagation in anisotropic, nonlinear, and time-varying media.
Microscopic and macroscopic description of electric-dipole susceptibilities.
Free and forced waves; phase matching; slowly varying envelope
approximation; dispersion, diffraction, space-time analogy. Harmonic
generation; frequency conversion; parametric amplification and oscillation;
electro-optic light modulation. Raman and Brillouin scattering; nonlinear
processes in optical fibers. Prerequisites: 242, 236C.
EE 348. Advanced Optical Fiber Communications. 3 Units.
Optical amplifiers: gain, saturation, noise. Semiconductor amplifiers.
Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. System applications: preamplified receiver
performance, amplifier chains. Raman amplifiers, lumped vs. distributed
amplification. Group-velocity dispersion management: dispersioncompensating
fibers, filters, gratings. Interaction of dispersion and
nonlinearity, dispersion maps. Multichannel systems. Wavelength-division
multiplexing components: filters, multiplexers. WDM systems, crosstalk.
Time, subcarrier, code and polarization-division multiplexing. Comparison
of modulation techniques: differential phase-shift keying, phase-shift
keying, quadrature-amplitude modulation. Comparison of detection
techniques: noncoherent, differentially coherent, coherent. Prerequisite:
247.
EE 355. Imaging Radar and Applications. 3 Units.
Radar remote sensing, radar image characteristics, viewing geometry,
range coding, synthetic aperture processing, correlation, range migration,
range/Doppler algorithms, wave domain algorithms, polar algorithm,
polarimetric processing, interferometric measurements. Applications:
surfafe deformation, polarimetry and target discrimination, topographic
mapping surface displacements, velocities of ice fields. Prerequisites:
EE261. Recommended: EE254, EE278B, EE279.
Same as: GEOPHYS 265.
EE 359. Wireless Communications. 3-4 Units.
This course will cover advanced topics in wireless communications for
voice, data, and multimedia. Topics include: an overview of current and
future wireless systems; wireless channel models including path loss,
shadowing, and statistical multipath channel models; fundamental capacity
limits of wireless channels; digital modulation and its performance in
fading and intersymbol interference; techniques to combat fading including
adaptive modulation, diversity, and multiple antenna systems (MIMO);
techniques to combat intersymbol interference including equalization,
multicarrier modulation (OFDM), and spread spectrum; and an overview of
wireless network design. Prerequisite: 279 or instructor consent.
EE 360. Multiuser Wireless Systems and Networks. 3 Units.
Design, analysis, and fundamental limits. Topics include multiuser channel
capacity, multiple and random access techniques, interference mitigation,
cellular system design, ad hoc wireless network design, sensor networks,
"green" wireless networks, cognitive radios, and cross-layer design.
Prerequisite: EE 359.
EE 361. Principles of Cooperation in Wireless Networks. 3 Units.
Information theory forms the basis for the design of all modern day
communication systems. The original theory was primarily point-topoint,
studying how fast information can flow across an isolated noisy
communication channel. Until recently, there has been only limited success
in extending the theory to a network of interacting nodes. Progress has
been made in the past decade driven by engineering interest in wireless
networks. The course provides a unified overview of this recent progress
made in information theory of wireless networks. Starting with an overview
of the capacity of fading and multiple-antenna wireless channels, we aim to
answer questions such as: What is the optimal way for users to cooperate
and exchange information in a wireless network? How much benefit can
optimal cooperation provide over traditional communication architectures?
How can cooperation help to deal with interference between multiple
wireless transmissions? Prerequisites: 376A.
EE 364A. Convex Optimization I. 3 Units.
Convex sets, functions, and optimization problems. The basics of convex
analysis and theory of convex programming: optimality conditions,
duality theory, theorems of alternative, and applications. Least-squares,
linear and quadratic programs, semidefinite programming, and geometric
programming. Numerical algorithms for smooth and equality constrained
problems; interior-point methods for inequality constrained problems.
Applications to signal processing, communications, control, analog and
digital circuit design, computational geometry, statistics, machine learning,
and mechanical engineering. Prerequisite: linear algebra such as EE263,
basic probability.
Same as: CME 364A, CS 334A.
EE 364B. Convex Optimization II. 3 Units.
Continuation of 364A. Subgradient, cutting-plane, and ellipsoid methods.
Decentralized convex optimization via primal and dual decomposition.
Monotone operators and proximal methods; alternating direction method
of multipliers. Exploiting problem structure in implementation. Convex
relaxations of hard problems. Global optimization via branch and bound.
Robust and stochastic optimization. Applications in areas such as control,
circuit design, signal processing, and communications. Course requirements
include project. Prerequisite: 364A.
Same as: CME 364B.
EE 365. STOCHASTIC CONTROL. 3 Units.
Introduction to stochastic control, with applications taken from a variety of
areas including supply-chain optimization, advertising, finance, dynamic
resource allocation, caching, and traditional automatic control. Markov
decision processes, optimal policy with full state information for finitehorizon
case, infinite-horizon discounted, and average stage cost problems.
Bellman value function, value iteration, and policy iteration. Approximate
dynamic programming. Linear quadratic stochastic control. Prerequisites:
EE 263, EE 278A or equivalent.
EE 368. Digital Image Processing. 3 Units.
Image sampling and quantization color, point operations, segmentation,
morphological image processing, linear image filtering and correlation,
image transforms, eigenimages, multiresolution image processing, noise
reduction and restoration, feature extraction and recognition tasks, image
registration. Emphasis is on the general principles of image processing.
Students learn to apply material by implementing and investigating image
processing algorithms in Matlab and optionally on Android mobile devices.
Term project. In the fall and spring quarter, a sequence of interactive web/
video modules substitutes the classroom lectures. In the winter quarter, the
course is taught conventionally; both versions of the course are equivalent.
Recommended: EE261, EE278B.
Same as: CS 232.
EE 369A. Medical Imaging Systems I. 3 Units.
Imaging internal structures within the body using high-energy radiation
studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities covered: x-ray, computed
tomography, and nuclear medicine. Analysis of existing and proposed
systems in terms of resolution, frequency response, detection sensitivity,
noise, and potential for improved diagnosis. Prerequisite: EE 261.
Course Descriptions
920 Course Descriptions
EE 369B. Medical Imaging Systems II. 3 Units.
Imaging internal structures within the body using non-ionizing radiation
studied from a systems viewpoint. Modalities include ultrasound and
magnetic resonance. Analysis of ultrasonic systems including diffraction
and noise. Analysis of magnetic resonance systems including physics,
Fourier properties of image formation, and noise. Prerequisite: EE 261.
EE 369C. Medical Image Reconstruction. 3 Units.
Reconstruction problems from medical imaging, including magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and positron
emission tomography (PET). Problems include reconstruction from nonuniform
frequency domain data, automatic deblurring, phase unwrapping,
reconstruction from incomplete data, and reconstruction from projections.
Prerequisite: 369B.
EE 371. Advanced VLSI Circuit Design. 3 Units.
Design of high-performance digital systems, the things that cause them
to fail, and how to avoid these problems. Topics will focus on current
issues including: wiring resistance and how to deal with it, power and Gnd
noise and regulation, clock (or asynchronous) system design and how to
minimize clocking overhead, high-speed I/O design, energy minimization
including leakage control, and structuring your Verilog code to result in
high-performance, low energy systems. Extensive use of modern CAD
tools. Prerequisites: 271 and 313, or consent of instructor.
EE 373A. Adaptive Signal Processing. 3 Units.
Learning algorithms for adaptive digital filters. Self optimization. Wiener
filter theory. Quadratic performance functions, their eigenvectors and
eigenvalues. Speed of convergence. Asymptotic performance versus
convergence rate. Applications of adaptive filters to statistical prediction,
process modeling, adaptive noise canceling, adaptive antenna arrays,
adaptive inverse control, and equalization and echo cancelling in modems.
Theoretical and experimental research projects in adaptive filter theory,
communications, and audio systems. Biomedical research projects,
supervised jointly by EE and Medical School faculty. Recommended:
EE263, EE264, EE278B.
EE 373B. Adaptive Neural Networks. 3 Units.
Artificial neural networks. Feedforward layered networks. Backpropagation
algorithm. Recurrent neural networks. Autoassociative neural networks.
Principal component analysis. Clustering algorithms. Applications of neural
networks to pattern recognition, speech recognition, adaptive control,
nonlinear adaptive filtering, and cognitive memory. Modeling human
memory. Design of human-like memory for computers, with applications to
face recognition, image processing, and complex control. Continuation of
research projects begun in 373A. Prerequisite: 373A.
EE 376A. Information Theory. 3 Units.
The fundamental ideas of information theory. Entropy and intrinsic
randomness. Data compression to the entropy limit. Huffman coding.
Arithmetic coding. Channel capacity, the communication limit. Gaussian
channels. Kolmogorov complexity. Asymptotic equipartition property.
Information theory and Kelly gambling. Applications to communication and
data compression. Prerequisite: EE178/278A or STATS 116, or equivalent.
Same as: STATS 376A.
EE 376B. Network Information Theory. 3 Units.
Network information theory deals with the fundamental limits on
information flow in networks and the optimal coding schemes that achieve
these limits. It aims to extend Shannon’s point-to-point information theory
and the Ford-Fulkerson max-flow min-cut theorem to networks with
multiple sources and destinations. The course presents the basic results and
tools in the field in a simple and unified manner. Topics covered include:
multiple access channels, broadcast channels, interference channels,
channels with state, distributed source coding, multiple description coding,
network coding, relay channels, interactive communication, and noisy
network coding. Prerequisites: EE376A.
EE 376C. Universal Schemes in Information Theory. 3 Units.
Universal schemes for lossless and lossy compression, channel coding
and decoding, prediction, denoising, and filtering. Characterization of
performance limitations in the stochastic settting: entropy rate, ratedistortion
function, channel capacity, Bayes envelope for prediction,
denoising, and filtering. Lempel-Ziv lossless compression, and Lempel-
Ziv based schemes for lossy compression, channel coding, prediction,
and filtering. Discrete universal denoising. Compression-based approach
to denoising. The compound decision problem. Prerequisites: EE278B,
EE376A,B.
EE 378A. Statistical Signal Processing. 3 Units.
Random signals in electrical engineering. Discrete-time random processes:
stationarity and ergodicity, covariance sequences, power spectral density,
parametric models for stationary processes. Fundamentals of linear
estimation: minimum mean squared error estimation, optimum linear
estimation, orthogonality principle, the Wold decomposition. Causal
linear estimation of stationary processes: the causal Wiener filter, Kalman
filtering. Parameter estimation: criteria of goodness of estimators, Fisher
information, Cramer-Rao inequality, Chapman-Robbins inequality,
maximum likelihood estimation, method of moments, consistency,
efficiency. ARMA parameter estimation: Yule-Walker equations, Levinson-
Durbin algorithm, least squares estimation, moving average parameter
estimation, modified Yule-Walker method for model order selection.
Spectrum estimation: sample covariances, covariance estimation, Bartlett
formula, periodogram, periodogram averaging, windowed periodograms.
Prerequisites: EE 278B.
EE 378B. Inference, Estimation, and Information Processing. 3 Units.
Techniques and models for signal, data and information processing,
with emphasis on incomplete data, non-ordered index sets and robust
low-complexity methods. Linear models; regularization and shrinkage;
dimensionality reduction; streaming algorithms; sketching; clustering,
search in high dimension; low-rank models; principal component
analysis.nnnApplications include: positioning from pairwise distances;
distributed sensing; measurement/traffic monitoring in networks; finding
communities/clusters in networks; recommendation systems; inverse
problems. Prerequisites: EE278B and EE263 or equivalent. Recommended
but not required: EE378A.
EE 379. Digital Communication. 3 Units.
Modulation methods and bandwidth requirements, baseband and passband
system analysis, minimum-probability-of-error and maximum-likelihood
detection, error-probability analysis, intersymbol interference, maximumlikelihood
sequence detection, equalization methods, orthogonal frequencydivision
multiplexing. Prerequisite: EE102B, EE278B.
EE 380. Colloquium on Computer Systems. 1 Unit.
Live presentations of current research in the design, implementation,
analysis, and applications of computer systems. Topics range over
a wide range and are different every quarter. Topics may include
fundamental science, mathematics, cryptography, device physics, integrated
circuits, computer architecture, programming, programming languages,
optimization, applications, simulation, graphics, social implications, venture
capital, patent and copyright law, networks, computer security, and other
topics of related to computer systems. May be repeated for credit.
EE 382C. Interconnection Networks. 3 Units.
The architecture and design of interconnection networks used to
communicate from processor to memory, from processor to processor, and
in switches and routers. Topics: network topology, routing methods, flow
control, router microarchitecture, and performance analysis. Enrollment
limited to 30. Prerequisite: 282.
Course Descriptions
Stanford University 921
EE 382E. Advanced Multi-Core Systems. 3 Units.
In-depth coverage of the architectural techniques used in modern, multicore
chips for mobile and server systems. Advanced processor design
techniques (superscalar cores, VLIW cores, multi-threaded cores, energyefficient
cores), cache coherence, memory consistency, vector processors,
graphics processors, heterogeneous processors, and hardware support for
security and parallel programming. Students will become familiar with
complex trade-offs between performance-power-complexity and hardwaresoftware
interactions. A central part of CS316 is a project on an open
research question on multi-core technologies. Prerequisites: EE 108B.
Recommended: CS 149, EE 282.
Same as: CS 316.
EE 384A. Internet Routing Protocols and Standards. 3 Units.
Local area networks addressing and switching; IEEE 802.1 bridging
protocols (transparent bridging, virtual LANs). Internet routing protocols:
interior gateways (RIP, OSPF) and exterior gateways (BGP); multicast
routing; multiprotocol label switching (MPLS). Routing in mobile
networks: Mobile IP, Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET), Wireless Mesh
Networks. Prerequisite: EE 284 or CS 144.
EE 384C. Wireless Local and Wide Area Networks. 3 Units.
Characteristics of wireless communication: multipath, noise, and
interference. Communications techniques: spread-spectrum, CDMA, and
OFDM. IEEE 802.11 physical layer specifications: FHSS, DSSS, IEEE
802.11b (CCK), and 802.11a/g (OFDM). IEEE 802.11 media access control
protocols: carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/
CA), point coordination function (PCF), IEEE802.11e for differentiated
services. IEEE 802.11 network architecture: ad hoc and infrastructure
modes, access point functionality. Management functions: synchronization,
power management and association. IEEE 802.11s Mesh Networks. IEEE
802.16 (WiMAX) network architecture and protocols: Physical Layer
(OFDMA) and Media Access Control Layer. Current research papers in the
open literature. Prerequisite: EE 284 or CS 244A.
EE 384M. Network Science. 3 Units.
Modern large-scale networks consist of (i) Information Networks, such as
the Web and Social Networks, and (ii) Data Centers, which are networks
interconnecting computing and storage elements for servicing the users of
an Information Network. This course is concerned with the mathematical
models and the algorithms used in Information Networks and Data Centers.
Prerequisite: EE178/278A or CS365.
EE 384S. Performance Engineering of Computer Systems & Networks.
3 Units.
Modeling and control methodologies for high-performance network
engineering, including: Markov chains and stochastic modeling, queueing
networks and congestion management, dynamic programming and
task/processor scheduling, network dimensioning and optimization,
and simulation methods. Applications for design of high-performance
architectures for wireline/wireless networks and the Internet, including:
traffic modeling, admission and congestion control, quality of service
support, power control in wireless networks, packet scheduling in switches,
video streaming over wireless links, and virus/worm propagation dynamics
and countermeasures. Enrollment limited to 30. Prerequisites: basic
networking technologies and probability.
EE 384X. Packet Switch Architectures. 3 Units.
The theory and practice of designing packet switches, such as Internet
routers, and Ethernet switches. Introduction: evolution of switches and
routers. Output queued switches: motivation and methods for providing
bandwidth and delay guarantees. Switching: output queueing, parallelism
in switches, distributed shared memory switches, input-queued switches,
combined input-output queued switches, how to make fast packet buffers,
buffered crossbar switches. Scheduling input queued crossbars: connections
with bipartite graph matching, algorithms for 100% throughput, practical
algorithms and heuristics. Looking forward: Architectures and switches for
data center networks. Prerequisites: EE284 or CS 244A. Recommended: EE
178/278A or EE 278B or STAT 116.
EE 385A. Robust and Testable Systems Seminar. 1-4 Unit.
Student/faculty discussions of research problems in the design of reliable
digital systems. Areas: fault-tolerant systems, design for testability,
production testing, and system reliability. Emphasis is on student
presentations and Ph.D. thesis research. May be repeated for credit.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor.
EE 386. Robust System Design. 3 Units.
Causes of system malfunctions; techniques for building robust systems that
avoid or are resilient to such malfunctions through built-in error detection
and correction, prediction, self-test, self-recovery, and self-repair; case
studies and new research problems. Prerequisites: 108A,B, 282.
EE 387. Algebraic Error Control Codes. 3 Units.
Theory and implementation of algebraic codes for detection and correction
of random and burst errors. Introduction to finite fields. Linear block codes,
cyclic codes, Hamming codes, BCH codes, Reed-Solomon codes. Decoding
algorithms for BCH and Reed-Solomon codes. Prerequisites: elementary
probability, linear algebra.
EE 390. Special Studies or Projects in Electrical Engineering. 1-15 Unit.
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member. Individual
or team activities may involve lab experimentation, design of devices or
systems, or directed reading. May be repeated for credit.
EE 391. Special Studies and Reports in Electrical Engineering. 1-15
Unit.
Independent work under the direction of a faculty member; written report or
written examination required. Letter grade given on the basis of the report;
if not appropriate, student should enroll in 390. May be repeated for credit.
EE 392E. VLSI Signal Processing. 3 Units.
DSP architecture design. Study of circuit and architecture techniques in
energy-area-performance space, design methodology based on a data-flow
graph model that leads to hardware implementation. We explore automated
wordlength reduction, direct and recursive filters, time-frequency analysis
and other examples. The project focuses on architecture exploration for
selected DSP algorithms. Useful for algorithm designers who consider
hardware constraints and for circuit designers who prototype DSP algorithms
in hardware. Prerequisites: EE102B and EE108A; Recommended:
EE264 and EE271.
EE 392F. Logic Synthesis of VLSI Circuits. 3 Units.
Similar to former 318. Solving logic design problems with CAD tools
for VLSI circuits. Exact and heuristic algorithms for logic synthesis.
Representation and optimization of combinational logic functions
(encoding problems, binary decision diagrams) and of multiple-level
networks (algebraic and Boolean methods, don’t-care set computation,
timing verification, and optimization);and modeling and optimization of
sequential functions and networks (retiming), semicustom libraries, and
library binding. Prerequisites: familiarity with logic design, algorithm
development, and programming.
EE 392I. Seminar on Trends in Computing and Communications. 1
Unit.
Lectures series and invited talks on current trends in computing and
communications, and ongoing initiatives for research and open innovation.
This year’s focus on evolving cloud computing architectures and their
impact on the enterprise; big data trends and rise of the third platform;
software as a service; wireless and cellular network architectures; mobility
and mobile data proliferation; open mobile platforms (e.g. Android);
multi-homed mobile networking, associated data communication and
mobile resource trade-offs, and system implementation in smartphones and
Android devices.
Course Descriptions
922 Course Descriptions
EE 392L. Modern Cellular Communication Systems. 3 Units.
Theoretical and practical aspects of design, development, and
implementation of modern cellular communication systems including
principles, requirements and constraints of system design and deployment
using examples from real-life cellular systems. Topics include radio access
network protocols; homogenous and heterogeneous network architectures;
power, mobility, and interference management; spectrum allocations;
network capacity and user throughput; multi-antenna transmission
techniques; RF and baseband signal processing; unicast and broadcast
multimedia services; multi-radio platforms; and future trends in cellular
communications. Suggested prerequisites: EE359, EE264, EE279, and
EE278B or equivalents.
EE 392N. INTELLIGENT ENERGY SYSTEMS. 1 Unit.
The key systems engineering steps for design of automated systems in
application to of existing and future intelligent energy systems. Existing
design approaches and practices for the energy systems. Every second
lecture of the course will be a guest lecture discussing the communication
system design for a certain type of energy system. They will alternate with
guest lectures discuss-ing the on-line analytical functions.
EE 392P. Nanoscale Device Physics. 3 Units.
The course develops an understanding of nanoscale devices relevant to
information manipulation: electronic drawing on ballistic, single electron,
quantum confinement, and phase transitions such as ferroelectric, metalinsulator,
and structural; magnetic employing field-switching, spin-torque