Computer Science
Except for CS 2, 95, and 99 the lower division
Computer Science courses are subject to the
“computing service” course restriction. See the
Computer Science Service Courses section
preceding the Electrical Engineering course
listings.
Lower Division Courses
3. Introduction to Symbolic Programming. (4) Refer
to computer science service course restrictions.
Two hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and two
hours of scheduled programming laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: High school algebra. Introduction to
computer programming, emphasizing symbolic computation
and functional programming style. Students
will write a project of at least 200 lines of code, using
the Scheme programming language. (F,SP) Clancy
3L. Introduction to Symbolic Programming. (4) One hour
of lecture and six hours of laboratory per week and approximately
five hours of self-scheduled programming
laboratory. Prerequisites: High school algebra. Introduction
to computer programming, emphasizing symbolic
computation and functional programming style.
Students will write a project of at least 200 lines of
code in Scheme (a dialect of the LISP programming
language). (F,SP) Clancy
3S. Introduction to Symbolic Programming (SelfPaced).
(1-4) Refer to computer science service
course restrictions. Course may be repeated up to 4
units. One to four hours of discussion and three to nine
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: High
school algebra. The same material as 3 but in a selfpaced
format; introduction to computer programming,
emphasizing symbolic computation and functional programming
style, using the Scheme programming language.
Units assigned depend on amount of work
completed. The first two units must be taken together.
(F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
9A. Matlab for Programmers. (1) Refer to computer
science service course restrictions. Self-paced. Must
be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Programming experience equivalent to that gained in
4; familiarity with applications of matrix processing. Introduction
to the constructs in the Matlab programming
language, aimed at students who already know how to
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 239
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
240 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
program. Array and matrix operations, functions and
function handles, control flow, plotting and image manipulation,
cell arrays and structures, and the Symbolic
Mathematics toolbox. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
9B. Pascal for Programmers. (1) Refer to computer
science service course restrictions. Self-paced. Must
be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Programming experience similiar to that gained in 3 or
77. Self-paced Pascal course for students who already
know how to program. This course provides the practice
with the use of pointers and linked data structures
that is assumed as prerequisite for 9C and 9F. (F,SP)
Clancy, Garcia
9C. C for Programmers. (1) Refer to computer science
service course restrictions. Must be taken on a
passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: Programming
experience with pointers (or addresses in assembly
language) and linked data structures equivalent to that
gained in 9B, 61A, or Engineering 77. Self-paced
course in the C programming language for students
who already know how to program. Computation, input
and output, flow of control, functions, arrays, and pointers,
linked structures, use of dynamic storage, and implementation
of abstract data types. (F,SP) Clancy,
Garcia
9D. Scheme and Functional Programming for Programmers.
(1) Refer to computer science service
course restrictions. Must be taken on a passed/not
passed basis. Prerequisites: Programming experience
similar to that gained in Engineering 77. Self-paced
course in functional programming, using the Scheme
programming language, for students who already know
how to program. Recursion; higher-order functions; list
processing; implementation of rule-based querying.
(F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
9E. Productive Use of the UNIX Environment. (1)
Refer to computer science service course restrictions.
Self-paced. Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Programming experience similar to
that gained in 61A or Engineering 77; DOS or UNIX
experience. Use of UNIX utilities and scripting facilities
for customizing the programming environment, organizing
files (possibly in more than one computer account),
implementing a personal database, reformatting
text, and searching for online resources. (F,SP)
Clancy, Garcia
9F. C++ for Programmers. (1) Refer to computer science
service course restrictions in the General Catalog.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Programming experience equivalent to that
gained in 9B, 61A, or Engineering 77. Self-paced introduction
to the constructs provided in the C++ programming
language for procedural and object-oriented
programming, aimed at students who already know
how to program. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
9G. JAVA for Programmers. (1) One hour of selfpaced
per week. Must be taken on a passed/not
passed basis. Prerequisites: 9C or 9F or 61A plus experience
with object-oriented programming or C-based
language. Self-paced course in Java for students who
already know how to program. Applets; variables and
computation; events and flow of control; classes and
objects; inheritance; GUI elements; applications; arrays,
strings, files, and linked structures; exceptions;
threads. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
9H. Python for Programmers. (1) Refer to computer
science service course restrictions. Self-paced. Must
be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Programming experience equivalent to that gained in
3 or 4. Introduction to the constraints provided in the
Python programming language, aimed at students who
already know how to program. Flow of control; strings,
tuples, lists, and dictionaries; CGI programming; file input
and output; object-oriented programming; GUI elements.
(F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
24. Freshman Seminars. (1) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar per
week. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a letter-grade basis.
Sections 3-4 to be graded on a passed/not passed
basis. The Freshman Seminar Program has been designed
to provide new students with the opportunity to
explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a
small-seminar setting. Freshman seminars are offered
in all campus departments, and topics vary from department
to department and semester to semester. Enrollment
limited to 15 freshmen. (F,SP)
39J. Freshman/Sophomore Seminar. (2-4) Course
may be repeated for credit as topic varies. Two to four
hours of seminar per week. Sections 1-2 to be graded
on a letter-grade basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on
a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: Priority
given to freshmen and sophomores. Freshman and
sophomore seminars offer lower division students the
opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member and a group of peers in a small-seminar
setting. These seminars are offered in all campus departments;
topics vary from department to department
and from semester to semester. Enrollment limits are
set by the faculty, but the suggested limit is 25. (F,SP)
39K. Freshman/Sophomore Seminar. (2-4) Course
may be repeated for credit as topic varies. Two to four
hours of seminar per week. Sections 1-2 to be graded
on a letter-grade basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on
a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: Priority
given to freshmen and sophomores. Freshman and
sophomore seminars offer lower division students the
opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member and a group of peers in a small-seminar
setting. These seminars are offered in all campus departments;
topics vary from department to department
and from semester to semester. Enrollment limits are
set by the faculty, but the suggested limit is 25. (F,SP)
39L. Freshman/Sophomore Seminar. (2-4) Course
may be repeated for credit as topic varies. Two to four
hours of seminar per week. Sections 1-2 to be graded
on a letter-grade basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on
a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: Priority
given to freshmen and sophomores. Freshman and
sophomore seminars offer lower division students the
opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty
member and a group of peers in a small-seminar
setting. These seminars are offered in all campus departments;
topics vary from department to department
and from semester to semester. Enrollment limits are
set by the faculty, but the suggested limit is 25. (F,SP)
47A. Completion of Work in Computer Science
61A. (1) Students will receive no credit for 47A after
taking 61A. Self-paced. Prerequisites: 61B or equivalent,
9D, and consent of instructor. Implementation of
generic operations. Streams and iterators. Implementation
techniques for supporting functional, objectoriented,
and constraint-based programming in the
Scheme programming language. Together with 9D,
47A constitutes an abbreviated, self-paced version of
61A for students who have already taken a course
equivalent to 61B. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
47B. Completion of Work in Computer Science 61B.
(1) Students will receive no credit for 47B after taking
61B. Self-paced. Prerequisites: A course in data structures,
9G or equivalent, and consent of instructor. Iterators.
Hashing, applied to strings and multi-dimensional
structures. Heaps. Storage management. Design and
implementation of a program containing hundreds of
lines of code. Students with sufficient partial credit in
61B may, with consent of instructor, complete the
credit in this self-paced course. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
47C. Completion of Work in Computer Science
61C. (1) Students will receive no credit for 47C after
taking 61C. Self-paced. Prerequisites: Experience with
assembly language including writing an interrupt handler,
9C or equivalent, and consent of instructor. MIPS
instruction set simulation. The assembly and linking
process. Caches and virtual memory. Pipelined computer
organization. Students with sufficient partial credit
in 61C may, with consent of instructor, complete the
credit in this self-paced course. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia
61A. The Structure and Interpretation of Computer
Programs. (4) Students will receive no credit for 61A
after taking 47A. Three hours of lecture, one and onehalf
hours of discussion, and one and one-half hours
of laboratory and two and one-half hours of unscheduled
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Mathematics
1A (may be taken concurrently); programming experience
equivalent to that gained in 3 or the Advanced
Placement Computer Science A course. Introduction
to programming and computer science. This course
exposes students to techniques of abstraction at several
levels: (a) within a programming language, using
higher-order functions, manifest types, data-directed
programming, and message-passing; (b) between programming
languages, using functional and rule-based
languages as examples. It also relates these techniques
to the practical problems of implementation of
languages and algorithms on a von Neumann machine.
There are several significant programming projects,
programmed in a dialect of the LISP language.
(F,SP) Clancy, Garcia, Harvey
61B. Data Structures. (4) Students will receive no
credit for 61B after taking 61BL. Three hours of lecture,
one hour of discussion, two hours of programming laboratory,
and an average of six hours of self-scheduled
programming laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 61A
with a grade of B- or better. Fundamental dynamic
data structures, including linear lists, queues, trees,
and other linked structures; arrays strings, and hash tables.
Storage management. Elementary principles of
software engineering. Abstract data types. Algorithms
for sorting and searching. Introduction to the Java
programming language. (F,SP) Clancy, Hilfinger,
Shewchuk
61BL. Data Structures and Programming Methodology.
(4) Students will receive no credit for 61BL after
taking 61B. One hour of lecture and six hours of
laboratory per week and an average of five hours of
self-scheduled programming laboratory. Prerequisites:
A grade of B- or better in 61A. The same material as
in 61B, but in a laboratory-based format. (F,SP) Clancy,
Hilfinger
61C. Machine Structures. (4) Students will receive no
credit for 61C after taking 47C. Three hours of lecture,
two hours of laboratory, and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 61B or 47B. The internal organization
and operation of digital computers. Machine
architecture, support for high-level languages (logic,
arithmetic, instruction sequencing) and operating systems
(I/O, interrupts, memory management, process
switching). Elements of computer logic design. Tradeoffs
involved in fundamental architectural design decisions.
(F,SP) Clancy, Wawrzynek, Staff
70. Discrete Mathematics and Probability Theory.
(4) Students will receive no credit for 70 after taking
Mathematics 55. Three hours of lecture per week, or
three hours of lecture and two hours of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Sophomore mathematical maturity,
and programming experience equivalent to that
gained in 3 or the Advanced Placement Computer Science
A course. Logic, infinity, and induction; applications
include undecidability and stable marriage problem.
Modular arithmetic and GCDs; applications
include primality testing and cryptography. Polynomials;
examples include error correcting codes and interpolation.
Probability including sample spaces, independence,
random variables, law of large numbers;
examples include load balancing, existence arguments,
Bayesian inference. Demmel, Papadimitriou,
Sinclair, Vazirani
84. Sophomore Seminar. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One hour of seminar
per week per unit for fifteen weeks. One and one half
hours of seminar per week per unit for 10 weeks. Two
hours of seminar per week per unit for eight weeks.
Three hours of seminar per week per unit for five
weeks. Sections 1-2 to be graded on a passed/not
passed basis. Sections 3-4 to be graded on a lettergrade
basis. Prerequisites: At discretion of instructor.
Sophomore seminars are small interactive courses offered
by faculty members in departments all across the
campus. Sophomore seminars offer opportunity for
close, regular intellectual contact between faculty
members and students in the crucial second year. The
topics vary from department to department and
semester to semester. Enrollment limited to 15 sophomores.
(F,SP)
98. Directed Group Study. (1-4) Course may be repeated
for credit. One hour of lecture per week per
unit. Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. Seminars for
group study of selected topics, which will vary from
year to year. Intended for students in the lower division.
(F,SP) Staff
99. Individual Study and Research for Undergraduates.
(1-2) Course may be repeated for credit.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
GPA of 3.4 or better. A course for lower division
students in good standing who wish to undertake
a program of individual inquiry initiated jointly by
the student and a professor. There are no other formal
prerequisites, but the supervising professor must be
convinced that the student is able to profit by the program.
(F,SP) Staff
Upper Division Courses
150. Components and Design Techniques for Digital
Systems. (5) Three hours of lecture, one hour of
discussion, and three hours of laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: 61C, Electrical Engineering 40 or 42.
Basic building blocks and design methods to contruct
synchronous digital systems. Alternative representations
for digital systems. Bipolar TTL vs. MOS implementation
technologies. Standard logic (SSI, MSI) vs.
programmable logic (PLD, PGA). Finite state machine
design. Digital computer building blocks as case studies.
Introduction to computer-aided design software.
Formal hardware laboratories and substantial design
project. Informal software laboratory periodically
throughout semester. (F,SP) Katz, Pister, Wawrzynek
152. Computer Architecture and Engineering. (5)
Three hours of lecture and two hours of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 61C. Instruction set design, Register
Transfer. Computer design project requiring about
100 hours. Data-path design. Controller design. Memory
system. Addressing. Microprogramming. Computer
arithmetic. Survey of real computers and microprocessors.
(F,SP) Culler, Kubiatowicz, Wawrzynek
160. User Interface Design and Development. (4)
Three hours of lecture, 1 hour of discussion, and four
hours of self-scheduled programming laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 61B. The design, implementation,
and evaluation of human/computer interfaces. Interface
devices (keyboard, pointing, display, audio, etc.),
metaphors (desktop, notecards, rooms, ledger sheets,
tables, etc.), interaction styles and dialog models, design
examples, and user-centered design and task
analysis. Interface-development methodologies, implementation
tools, testing, and quality assessment.
Students will develop a direct-manipulation interface.
Agrawala, Bajcsy, Canny
161. Computer Security. (4) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
61C (Machine Structures), plus either 70 (Discrete
Mathematics) or Mathematics 55. Introduction to computer
security. Cryptography, including encryption, authentication,
hash functions, cryptographic protocols,
and applications. Operating system security, access
control. Network security, firewalls, viruses, and
worms. Software security, defensive programming, and
language-based security. Case studies from real-world
systems. (F,SP) Joseph, Tygar, Vazirani, Wagner
162. Operating Systems and System Programming.
(4) Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion,
and four hours of programming laboratory per
week. Prerequisites: 61B, 61C, and Math 55. Basic
concepts of operating systems and system programming.
Utility programs, subsystems, multiple-program
systems. Processes, interprocess communication, and
synchronization. Memory allocation, segmentation,
paging. Loading and linking, libraries. Resource allocation,
scheduling, performance evaluation. File systems,
storage devices, I/O systems. Protection, security,
and privacy. (F,SP) Joseph, Kubiatowicz, Smith
164. Programming Languages and Compilers. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 61B and 61C. Survey of programming
languages. The design of modern programming
languages. Principles and techniques of
scanning, parsing, semantic analysis, and code generation.
Implementation of compilers, interpreters, and
assemblers. Overview of run-time organization and error
handling. (F,SP) Bodik, Hilfinger, Necula
169. Software Engineering. (4) Three hours of lecture
and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
61B and 61C, Math 55 or 113. Ideas and techniques
for designing, developing, and modifying large software
systems. Function-oriented and object-oriented
modular design techniques, designing for re-use and
maintainability. Specification and documentation.
Verification and validation. Cost and quality metrics
and estimation. Project team organization and management.
Students will work in teams on a substantial
programming project. (F,SP) Bodik, Brewer, Keutzer,
Necula, Sen
170. Efficient Algorithms and Intractable Problems.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 61B, Mathematics 55. Concept
and basic techniques in the design and analysis
of algorithms; models of computation; lower bounds;
algorithms for optimum search trees, balanced trees
and UNION-FIND algorithms; numerical and algebraic
algorithms; combinatorial algorithms. Turing machines,
how to count steps, deterministic and nondeterministic
Turing machines, NP-completeness. Unsolvable
and intractable problems. (F,SP) Sinclair, Papadimitriou,
Rao, Vazirani
172. Computability and Complexity. (4) Three hours
of lecture and one hour of discussion per week. Prerequisites:
170. Finite automata, Turing machines and
RAMs. Undecidable, exponential, and polynomial-time
problems. Polynomial-time equivalence of all reasonable
models of computation. Nondeterministic Turing
machines. Theory of NP-completeness: Cook’s theorem,
NP-completeness of basic problems. Selected
topics in language theory, complexity and randomness.
(F,SP) Papadimitriou, Sestia, Sinclair, Vazirani
174. Combinatorics and Discrete Probability. (4)
Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per
week. Prerequisites: 170. Permutations, combinations,
principle of inclusion and exclusion, generating functions,
Ramsey theory. Expectation and variance,
Chebychev’s inequality, Chernov bounds. Birthday
paradox, coupon collector’s problem, Markov chains
and entropy computations, universal hashing, random
number generation, random graphs and probabilistic
existence bounds. (F,SP) Canny, Papadimitriou, Sinclair,
Vazirani
C182. The Neural Basis of Thought and Language.
(4) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 61B; Cognitive Science C101,
Linguistics C105 or Cognitive Science C100, Psychology
C120B; or consent of instructor. This is a
course on the current status of interdisciplinary studies
that seeks to answer the following questions: (1)
How is it possible for the human brain, which is a
highly structured network of neurons, to think and to
learn, use, and understand language? (2) How are language
and thought related to perception, motor control,
and our other neural systems, including social cognition?
(3) How do the computational properties of neural
systems and the specific neural structures of the
human brain shape the nature of thought and language?
Much of the course will focus on the Neural
Theory of Language (NTL), which seeks to answer
these questions in terms of architecture and mechanism,
using models and simulations of language and
learning phenomena. Also listed as Cognitive Science
C110 and Linguistics C109. (SP)
184. Foundations of Computer Graphics. (4) Three
hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and three
hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: 61B; programming
skills in C, C++, or Java; linear algebra and
calculus. Techniques of modeling objects for the purpose
of computer rendering: boundary representations,
constructive solids geometry, hierarchical scene descriptions.
Mathematical techniques for curve and surface
representation. Basic elements of a computer
graphics rendering pipeline; architecture of modern
graphics display devices. Geometrical transformations
such as rotation, scaling, translation, and their matrix
representations. Homogeneous coordinates, projective
and perspective transformations. Algorithms for clipping,
hidden surface removal, rasterization, and antialiasing.
Scan-line based and ray-based rendering algorithms.
Lighting models for reflection, refraction,
transparency. (F,SP) Barsky, O’Brien, Sequin
186. Introduction to Database Systems. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 61B and 61C. Access methods and file
systems to facilitate data access. Hierarchical, network,
relational, and object-oriented data models. Query languages
for models. Embedding query languages in
programming languages. Database services including
protection, integrity control, and alternative views of
data. High-level interfaces including application generators,
browsers, and report writers. Introduction to
transaction processing. Database system implementation
to be done as term project. (F,SP) Franklin,
Hellerstein
188. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 61A or 61B and consent of instructor; 70
or Mathematics 55. Basic ideas and techniques underlying
the design of intelligent computer systems.
Topics include heuristic search, problem solving, game
playing, knowledge representation, logical inference,
planning, reasoning under uncertainty, expert systems,
learning, perception, language understanding. (F,SP)
Klein, Malik
C191. Quantum Information Science and Technology.
(3) Three hours of lecture/discussion per
week. Prerequisites: Mathematics 54, Physics 7A-7B,
and either Physics 7C, Mathematics 55, or Computer
Science 170. This multidisciplinary course provides an
introduction to fundamental conceptual aspects of
quantum mechanics from a computational and informational
theoretic perspective, as well as physical implementations
and technological applications of quantum
information science. Basic sections of quantum
algorithms, complexity, and cryptography, will be
touched upon, as well as pertinent physical realizations
from nanoscale science and engineering. Also listed as
Physics C191 and Chemistry C191. (F,SP) Crommie,
Vazirani, Whaley
194. Special Topics. (1-4) Course may be repeated
for credit as topic varies. One to fours hours of lecture/discussion
per week. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Topics will vary semester to semester. See
the Computer Science Division announcements.
(F,SP) Staff
195. Social Implications of Computer Technology.
(2) Three hours of lecture/discussion per week. Must
be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites:
Major in EECS or CS or consent of instructor. Topics
include electronic community; the changing nature of
work; technological risks; the information economy; intellectual
property; privacy; artificial intelligence and the
sense of self; pornography and censorship; professional
ethics. Students will lead discussions on some
of these topics. (SP) Harvey
C195. Social Implications of Computer Technology.
(2) Three hours of lecture/discussion per week.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis. Topics
include electronic community; the changing nature of
work; technological risks; the information economy; intellectual
property; privacy; artificial intelligence and the
sense of self; pornography and censorship; professional
ethics. Students will lead discussions on some
of these topics. Also listed as Interdisciplinary Studies
Field Maj C155. Harvey
H196A-H196B. Senior Honors Thesis Research. (1-
4;1-4) Individual research. Prerequisites: Open only to
students in the computer science honors program.
Thesis work under the supervision of a faculty member.
To obtain credit the student must, at the end of
two semesters, submit a satisfactory thesis to the Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science department
archive. A total of four units must be taken. The units
many be distributed between one or two semesters in
any way. H196A-H196B count as graded technical
elective units, but may not be used to satisfy the requirement
for 27 upper division technical units in the
College of Letters and Science with a major in Computer
Science. (F,SP)
198. Directed Group Studies for Advanced Undergraduates.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences / 241
R prefix=course satisfies R&C requirement
AC suffix=course satisfies American Cultures
requirement
*Professor of the Graduate School
†Recipient of Distinguished Teaching Award
B prefix=language course for business majors
C prefix=cross-listed course
H prefix=honors course
242 / Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
credit. Course format varies with section. Must be
taken on a passed/not passed basis. Prerequisites: 2.0
GPA or better; 60 units completed. Group study of selected
topics in Computer Sciences, usually relating to
new developments.
199. Supervised Independent Study. (1-4) Enrollment
is restricted; see the Introduction to Courses and
Curricula section of this catalog. Individual conferences.
Must be taken on a passed/not passed basis.
Prerequisites: Consent of instructor and major adviser.
Supervised independent study. Enrollment restrictions
apply. (F,SP) Staff
Graduate Courses
250. VLSI Systems Design. (4) Three hours of lecture
and four hours design laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
150. Unified top-down and bottom-up design of
integrated circuits and systems concentrating on architectural
and topological issues. VLSI architectures,
systolic arrays, self-timed systems. Trends in VLSI development.
Physical limits. Tradeoffs in custom-design,
standard cells, gate arrays. VLSI design tools. (F)
Wawrzynek
252. Graduate Computer Architecture. (4) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 152. Graduate survey of contemporary
computer organizations covering: early systems, CPU
design, instruction sets, control, processors, busses,
ALU, memory, I/O interfaces, connection networks, virtual
memory, pipelined computers, multiprocessors,
and case studies. Term paper or project is required.
(F,SP) Culler, Kubiatowicz, Patterson
258. Parallel Processors. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 252. In-depth study of
the design, engineering, and evaluation of modern
parallel computers. Fundamental design: naming,
synchronization, latency, and bandwidth. Architectural
evolution and technological driving forces. Parallel
programming models, communication primitives, programming
and compilation techniques, multiprogramming
workloads and methodology for quantitative
evaluation. Latency avoidance through replication in
small-scale and large-scale shared memory designs;
cache-coherency, protocols, directories, and memory
consistency models. Message passing: protocols, storage
management, and deadlock. Efficient network interface,
protection, events, active messages, and coprocessors
in large-scale designs. Latency tolerance
through prefetching, multithreading, dynamic instruction
scheduling, and software techniques. Network design:
topology, packaging, k-ary n-cubes, performance
under contention. Synchronization: global operations,
mutual exclusion, and events. Alternative architectures:
dataflow, SIMD, systoltic arrays. Culler
260. User-Interfaces to Computer Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162
and 164 recommended, or consent of instructor. Formerly
CS 287. Design and implementation of user-interfaces
to computer systems. Software and hardware
architectures for personal workstations. Object-oriented
programming systems. Form-based user-interfaces.
Window and display management abstractions. Case
studies of naive- and expert-user interfaces. Students
will complete a substantial project. Canny
261. Security in Computer Systems. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162. Graduate survey
of modern topics in computer security, including
protection, access control, distributed access security,
firewalls, secure coding practices, safe languages, mobile
code, and case studies from real-world systems.
May also cover cryptographic protocols, privacy and
anonymity, and/or other topics as time permits. (SP)
Brewer
262A. Advanced Topics in Computer Systems. (4)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162
and entrance exam. Formerly 262. Graduate survey of
systems for managing computation and information,
covering a breadth of topics: early systems; volatile
memory management, including virtual memory and
buffer management; persistent memory systems, including
both file systems and transactional storage
managers; storage metadata, physical vs. logical naming,
schemas, process scheduling, threading and concurrency
control; system support for networking, including
remote procedure calls, transactional RPC,
TCP, and active messages; security infrastructure; extensible
systems and APIs; performance analysis and
engineering of large software systems. Homework assignments,
exam, and term paper or project required.
(F,SP) Hellerstein
262B. Advanced Topics in Computer Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 262A.
Continued graduate survey of large-scale systems for
managing information and computation. Topics include
basic performance measurement; extensibility, with attention
to protection, security, and management of abstract
data types; index structures, including support for
concurrency and recovery; parallelism, including parallel
architectures, query processing and scheduling;
distributed data management, including distributed and
mobile file systems and databases; distributed caching;
large-scale data analysis and search. Homework assignments,
exam, and term paper or project required.
(F,SP) Brewer, Franklin, Hellerstein, Joseph
263. Design of Programming Languages. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of discussion per week.
Prerequisites: 164. Selected topics from: analysis,
comparison, and design of programming languages,
formal description of syntax and semantics, advanced
programming techniques, structured programming, debugging,
verification of programs and compilers, and
proofs of correctness. Yelick
264. Implementation of Programming Languages.
(4) Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, and
six hours programing laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
164, 263 recommended. Compiler construction.
Lexical analysis, syntax analysis. Semantic analysis
code generation and optimization. Storage management.
Run-time organization. Graham
265. Compiler Optimization and Code Generation.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 164.
Table-driven and retargetable code generators. Register
management. Flow analysis and global optimization
methods. Code optimization for advanced languages
and architectures. Local code improvement. Optimization
by program transformation. Selected additional
topics. A term paper or project is required. Graham
266. Introduction to System Performance Analysis.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162
and Statistics 5. Formerly 267 and 268. Performance
indices. Evaluation techniques. Measurement: instrumentation,
design of experiments, interpretation of results.
Simulation modeling: simulator design, model
calibration, statistical analysis of output data. Introduction
to analytic modeling. Workload characterization.
Tuning, procurement, and capacity planning application.
Program performance evaluation. File and
I/O system optimization. CPU Scheduling and architecture
performance analysis. Smith
C267. Applications of Parallel Computers. (3) Three
hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.
Models for parallel programming. Fundamental algorithms
for linear algebra, sorting, FFT, etc. Survey of
parallel machines and machine structures. Exiting parallel
programming languages, vectorizing compilers,
environments, libraries and toolboxes. Data partitioning
techniques. Techniques for synchronization and
load balancing. Detailed study and algorithm/program
development of medium sized applications. Also listed
as Engineering C233. Demmel, Yelick
268. Computer Networks. (3) 292V Three hours of
lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162. Distributed systems,
their notivations, applications, and organization.
The network component. Network architectures. Local
and long-haul networks, technologies, and topologies.
Data link, network, and transport protocols.
Point-to-point and broadcast networks. Routing and
congestion control. Higher-level protocols. Naming.
Internetworking. Examples and case studies. Joseph,
Katz, Stoica
270. Combinatorial Algorithms and Data Structures.
(3) Three hours of lecture and one hour of discussion
per week. Prerequisites: 170. Design and
analysis of efficient algorithms for combinatorial problems.
Network flow theory, matching theory, matroid
theory; augmenting-path algorithms; branch-and-bound
algorithms; data structure techniques for efficient implementation
of combinatorial algorithms; analysis of
data structures; applications of data structure techniques
to sorting, searching, and geometric problems.
Papadimitriou, Sinclair, Vazirani
271. Randomness and Computation. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 170 and at
least one course numbered 270-279. Computational
applications of randomness and computational theories
of randomness. Approximate counting and uniform
generation of combinatorial objects, rapid convergence
of random walks on expander graphs, explicit construction
of expander graphs, randomized reductions,
Kolmogorov complexity, pseudo-random number generation,
semi-random sources. Sinclair
273. Foundations of Parallel Computation. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 170, or
consent of instructor. Formerly 292K. Fundamental
theoretical issues in designing parallel algorithms and
architectures. Shared memory models of parallel computation.
Parallel algorithms for linear algegra, sorting,
Fourier Transform, recurrence evaluation, and graph
problems. Interconnection network based models. Algorithm
design techniques for networks like hypercubes,
shuffle-exchanges, threes, meshes and butterfly
networks. Systolic arrays and techniques for
generating them. Message routing. Staff
274. Computational Geometry. (3) Course may be
repeated for credit. Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 170 or equivalent. Formerly 292T. Constructive
problems in computational geometry: convex
hulls, triangulations, Voronoi diagrams, arrangements
of hyperplanes; relationships among these problems.
Search problems: advanced data structures; subdivision
search; various kinds of range searches. Models
of computation; lower bounds. Staff
276. Cryptography. (3) Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites: 170. Graduate survey of modern topics
on theory, foundations, and applications of modern cryptography.
One-way functions; pseudorandomness; encryption;
authentication; public-key cryptosystems;
notions of security. May also cover zero-knowledge
proofs, multi-party cryptographic protocols, practical
applications, and/or other topics, as time permits.
(F,SP) Trevisan, Wagner
278. Machine-Based Complexity Theory. (3) Three
hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 170. Properties
of abstract complexity measures; Determinism
vs. nondeterminism; time vs. space; complexity hierarchies;
aspects of the P-NP question; relative power
of various abstract machines. Vazirani
C280. Computer Vision. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Knowledge of linear algebra
and calculus. Mathematics 1A-1B, 53, 54 or equivalent.
Paradigms for computational vision. Relation to
human visual perception. Mathematical techniques for
representing and reasoning, with curves, surfaces and
volumes. Illumination and reflectance models. Color
perception. Image segmentation and aggregation.
Methods for bottom-up three dimensional shape recovery:
Line drawing analysis, stereo, shading, motion,
texture. Use of object models for prediction and recognition.
Also listed as Vision Science C280. Malik,
Forsyth
C281A. Statistical Learning Theory. (3) Three hours
of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Linear algebra, calculus,
basic probability, and statistics, algorithms. Recommended
289. Classification regression, clustering,
dimensionality, reduction, and density estimation. Mixture
models, hierarchical models, factorial models, hidden
Markov, and state space models, Markov properties,
and recursive algorithms for general probabilistic
inference nonparametric methods including decision
trees, kernal methods, neural networks, and wavelets.
Ensemble methods. Also listed as Statistics C241A.
(F)
C281B. Advanced Topics in Learning and Decision
Making. (3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
C281A, Statistics C241A. Recent topics include:
Graphical models and approximate inference algorithms.
Markov chain Monte Carlo, mean field and
probability propagation methods. Model selection and
stochastic realization. Bayesian information theoretic
and structural risk minimization approaches. Markov
decision processes and partially observable Markov
decision processes. Reinforcement learning. Also listed
as Statistics C241B. (SP)
282. Algebraic Algorithms. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: 164, Mathematics 113B, or
permission of instructor. Theory and construction of
symbolic algebraic computer programs. Polynomial
arithmetic, GCD, factorization, integration of elementary
functions, analytic approximation, simplification,
design of computer systems and languages for symbolic
manipulation. Fateman
284. Computer-Aided Geometric Design and Modeling.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
Mathematical skill in calculus and linear algebra.
Mathematical techniques for curve and surface representation,
including: Hermite interpolation, interpolatory
splines, tensed splines, Bezier curves and surfaces,
B-splines, Beta-splines, Coons patches, tensor
product forms, as well as subdivision end/bounding
conditions, and computational considerations. Barsky
285. Solid Free-Form Modeling and Fabrication. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 184.
From shape design to computer-based descriptions
suitable for manufacturing or rapid prototyping. Solid
modeling techniques and procedural shape generation.
Effective data structures and unambiguous part description
formats. Algorithms for dealing with Boolean
operations and for machine tool path planning. Problems
of finite-precision geometry and machining tolerances.
Introduction to some rapid prototyping techniques
based on Solid Free-Form Fabrication and NC
machining. Other advanced topics and recent developments
in the field. Sequin
286. Implementation of Data Base Systems. (3)
Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: 162
and 186. Implementation of data base systems on
modern hardware systems. Considerations concerning
operating system design, including buffering, page
size, prefetching, etc. Query processing algorithms, design
of crash recovery and concurrency control systems.
Implementation of distributed data bases and
data base machines. Hellerstein
287. Advanced Robotics. (3) Three hours of lecture
per week. Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 125.
Advanced topics related to current research in robotics.
Planning and control issues for realistic robot systems,
taking into account: dynamic constraints, control and
sensing uncertainty, and non-holonomic motion constraints.
Analysis of friction for assembly and grasping
tasks. Sensing systems for hands including tactile and
force sensing. Environmental perception from sparse
sensors for dextrous hands. Grasp planning and manipulation.
Canny
288. Artificial Intelligence Approach to Natural Language
Processing. (3) Three hours of lecture per
week plus programming assignment. Prerequisites:
164. Representation of conceptual structures, language
analysis and production, models of inference
and memory, high-level text structures, question answering
and conversation, machine translation. Klein,
Malik
289. Knowledge Representation and Use in Computers.
(3) Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites:
188 or equivalent. Fundamentals of knowledge
representation and use in computers. Predicate calculus,
non-monotonic logics, probability and decision
theory, and their use in capturing commonsense and
expert knowledge. Theorem-provers, planning systems
belief networks and influence diagrams as reasoning
methods. Integrated architectures for intelligent agents.
A project will be undertaken. Russell
C293A. Vision A: Quantitative, Perceptual, and
Physiological Aspects. (2) Three hours of lecture per
week for seven and one-half weeks. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor. The course will present basic
material on the retina and visual pathways, psychophysical
measurements, visual sensitivity, color vision,
and the estimation of disparity and motion. Introduction
to front-end visual processing in mammalian
visual system. Basic optics, anatomy and physiology
of retina, lateral geniculate nucleus, and primary visual
cortex. Psychophysics of color, light and dark adaptation,
spatial contrast sensitivity, spatial resolution,
spatiotemporal contrast sensitivity, motion and disparity
measurement. Connections between psychophysics
and physiology. Relevant modeling techniques such as
linear systems, signal detection theory, and information
theory will be introduced and applied. There will be an
accompanying laboratory which the students can register
for separately. Also listed as Psychology C215A,
Vision Science C290A, and Molecular and Cell Biology
C264A.
C293B. Vision B: Quantitative, Perceptual, and
Physiological Aspects. (2) Three hours of lecture per
week for seven and one-half weeks. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor. The course will present basic
material on inferring 3d from visual information. This
will include disparity, motion, texture, shading, and occlusion.
Introduction to the psychophysics and mathematical
analysis underlying the inference of 3d scene
properties from 2d retinal images. Psychophysics of
various cues to 3d shape and spatial layout such as
texture, contour, shading, stereopsis, and structure
from motion. Geometrical analysis of these cues. Probabilitic
theory for optimal combination of cues and estimation
of scene properties. Relevant physiology of
V1, V2, V4, and higher areas. Also listed as Psychology
C215B, Vision Science C290B, and Molecular and
Cell Biology C264B.
C293C. Vision C: Perceptual Organization. (2)
Three hours of lecture per week for seven and one-half
weeks. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor. This
course will cover “mid-level” visual processing, including
the perception of objects, their properties, and
the determination of part-whole structure from optical
images. The approach will be interdisciplinary, including
material from psychophysics, classical perceptual
psychology, computational modeling, and neuroscience.
Specific topics include perception of color,
grouping, figure-ground organization, modal and
amodal completion, and part-whole structure. Also
listed as Molecular and Cell Biology C264C, Vision
Science C290C, and Psychology C215C.
C293D. Vision D: High-Level Vision. (2) Three hours
of lecture per week for seven and one-half weeks. Prerequisites:
Consent of instructor. This course will cover
“high-level” visual processing, including object recognition,
visual attention, visual memory, visual imagery,
and visual awarness. The approach will be interdisciplinary,
including material from psychophysics, classical
perceptual psychology, computational modeling
and neurosciences. Also listed as Molecular and Cell
Biology C264D, Vision Science C290D, and Psychology
C215D.
C293L. Vision Laboratory: Quantitative, Perceptual,
and Physiological Aspects. (1) Course may be repeated
for credit. One hour of laboratory per week for
seven and one-half weeks. Prerequisites: Consent of
instructor. Quantitative analysis of psychophysical
properties of spatial, color, temporal and binocular vision,
motion sensitivity and adaptation and their underlying
physiological mechanisms. Also listed as Psychology
C215L, Vision Science C290L, and Molecular
and Cell Biology C264L.
294. Special Topics. (1-4) Course may be repeated
for credit. Topics will vary from semester to semester.
See Computer Science Division announcements.
(F,SP) Staff
297. Field Studies in Computer Science. (1-12)
Course may be repeated for credit. Independent study.
Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis.
Supervised experience in off-campus companies relevant
to specific aspects and applications of electrical
engineering and/or computer science. Written report
required at the end of the semester. (F,SP)
298. Group Studies Seminars, or Group Research.
(1-4) Course may be repeated for credit. One to four
hours per unit. Sections 1-25 to be graded on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Sections 26-35 to be
graded on a letter-grade basis. Advanced study in various
subjects through seminars on topics to be selected
each year, informal group studies of special
problems, group participation in comprehensive design
problems, or group research on complete problems for
analysis and experimentation. (F,SP) Staff
299. Individual Research. (1-12) Course may be repeated
for credit. Investigations of problems in computer
science. (F,SP) Staff
602. Individual Study for Doctoral Students. (1-8)
Course may be repeated for credit. Course does not
satisfy unit or residence requirements for doctoral degree.
Independent study, consultation with faculty
member. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Individual study in consultation with the major
field adviser, intended to provide an opportunity for
qualified students to prepare themselves for the various
examinations required of candidates for the Ph.D.
(and other doctoral degrees). (F,SP) Staff
Professional Courses
300. Teaching Practice. (1-6) Course may be repeated
for credit. Three to twenty hours of discussion
and consulting per week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Supervised teaching practice,
in either a one-on-one tutorial or classroom discussion
setting. (F,SP) Staff
301. Teaching Techniques for Computer Science.
(1) Course may be repeated for credit. One hour of
discussion per week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Consent of instructor.
Discussion and practice of techniques for effective
teaching. (F,SP) Clancy, Garcia, Harvey
302. Designing Computer Science Education. (3)
Two hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: Computer
Science 301 and two semesters of GSI experience.
Discussion and review of research and practice
relating to the teaching of computer science: knowledge
organization and misconceptions, curriculum and
topic organization, evaluation, collaborative learning,
technology use, and administrative issues. As part of
a semester-long project to design a computer science
course, participants invent and refine a variety of
homework and exam activities, and evaluate alternatives
for textbooks, grading and other administrative
policies, and innovative uses of technology. (SP) Clancy
399. Professional Preparation: Supervised Teaching
of Computer Science. (1,2) Course may be repeated
for credit. One hour of meeting with instructor
plus 10 hours (1 unit) or 20 hours (2 units) of teaching
per week. Must be taken on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory
basis. Prerequisites: Appointment as graduate
student instructor. Discussion, problem review and development,
guidance of computer science laboratory
sections, course development, supervised practice
teaching. (F,SP) Staff